--- Page 1 ---
Substance 
use 
disorders
DR ANDREA COLADNER, DO, MHA, 
FAAPMR
ASST PROF , DEPT OF FAMILY 
MEDICINE
CLINICAL COORDINATOR, AHCC, 
FHCC
2026

--- Page 2 ---
Objectiv
es
Discuss the use, disorder, intoxication, dependence and 
withdrawal of the commonly encountered substances in 
the clinical setting 
Explore resources available for providers and patients in 
need of information regarding substance use disorders 
--- Page 3 ---
resources
• https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK565474/table/nycgsubuse.tab9/#_ncbi_dlg_citbx_NBK565474
• https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK557381/#_ncbi_dlg_citbx_NBK557381
• Jesse S, Bråthen G, Ferrara M, Keindl M, Ben -Menachem E, Tanasescu R, Brodtkorb E, Hillbom M, Leone MA, 
Ludolph AC. Alcohol withdrawal syndrome: mechanisms, manifestations, and management. Acta Neurol Scand. 
2017 Jan;135(1):4-16. doi: 10.1111/ane.12671. Epub 2016 Sep 1. PMID: 27586815; PMCID: PMC6084325.
• https://www.niaaa.nih.gov
• Ziedonis D, Das S, Larkin C. Tobacco use disorder and treatment: new challenges and opportunities. Dialogues 
Clin Neurosci. 2017 Sep;19(3):271 -280. doi: 10.31887/DCNS.2017.19.3/ dziedonis. PMID: 29302224; PMCID: 
PMC5741110.
• McLaughlin I, Dani JA, De Biasi M. Nicotine withdrawal. Curr Top Behav Neurosci. 2015;24:99-123. doi: 
10.1007/978-3-319-13482-6_4. PMID: 25638335; PMCID: PMC4542051.
• Patel J, Marwaha R. Cannabis Use Disorder. [Updated 2022 Jul 11]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): 
StatPearls Publishing; 2023 Jan-. Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK538131/
• DSM 5 pages 490-585
--- Page 4 ---
Sud 
defined
Substance use disorder (SUD) is a complex condition in which there 
is uncontrolled use of a substance despite harmful consequences. 
People with SUD have an intense focus on using a certain substance(s) 
such as alcohol, tobacco, or illicit drugs, to the point where the 
person's ability to function in day-to-day life becomes impaired. 
People keep using the substance even when they know it is causing or 
will cause more harm than good.
SUDs are classified as mild, moderate, or severe based on how many 
of the 11 criteria are fulfilled: mild, any 2 or 3 criteria; moderate, 
any 4 or 5 criteria; severe, any 6 or more criteria.
Elevated risk of suicide
--- Page 5 ---
Dsm 5 
criteria
1-4Impaired control over 
substance use
(DSM-5 criteria 1 to 4)
Consuming the substance in larger 
amounts and for a longer amount of time 
than intended.
•Persistent desire to cut down or regulate 
use. The individual may have 
unsuccessfully attempted to stop in the 
past.
•Spending a great deal of time obtaining, 
using, or recovering from the effects of 
substance use.
•Experiencing craving, a pressing desire 
to use the substance.
--- Page 6 ---
Criteria 
5-7
Social 
impairment
(DSM-5 criteria 5 
to 7)
•Substance use impairs ability to 
fulfill major obligations at work, 
school, or home.
•Continued use of the substance 
despite it causing significant 
social or interpersonal problems.
•Reduction or discontinuation of 
recreational, social, or 
occupational activities because of 
substance use.
--- Page 7 ---
RISKY USE
(DSM -5 CRITERIA 8 AND 
9)
•RECURRENT SUBSTANCE USE IN 
PHYSICALLY UNSAFE ENVIRONMENTS.
•PERSISTENT SUBSTANCE USE DESPITE 
KNOWLEDGE THAT IT MAY CAUSE OR 
EXACERBATE PHYSICAL OR 
PSYCHOLOGICAL PROBLEMS.
--- Page 8 ---
Criteria 10 & 11
Pharmacologic
(DSM-5 criteria 10 and 
11)
•Tolerance:Individual requires increasingly higher 
doses of the substance to achieve the desired 
effect, or the usual dose has a reduced effect; 
individuals may build tolerance to specific 
symptoms at different rates.
•Withdrawal:A collection of signs and symptoms 
that occurs when blood and tissue levels of the 
substance decrease. Individuals are likely to seek 
the substance to relieve symptoms. No 
documented withdrawal symptoms from 
hallucinogens, PCP , or inhalants.
•Note: Individuals can have an SUD with 
prescription medications, so tolerance and 
withdrawal (criteria 10 and 11) in the context of 
appropriate medical treatment donot count as 
criteria for an SUD.
--- Page 9 ---
Binge drinking: BAC to 
0.08%, women>/=4 
drinks, men>/=5drinks 
within 2 hours 
Heavy drinking: 
men>/=5 a day/15 per 
week, women >/=4 a 
day or >/=8 per week
High intensity drinking: 
two times binge 
drinking thresholds 
--- Page 10 ---
84% of people over 
18 yrs old have had a 
drink/23% report 
binging
23% of youths 
aged12-17 reported 
alcohol use/3% 
report binge drinking
0.4% of 12 to 17 yr 
olds reported heavy 
alcohol consumption 
6.4% of 18yr olds and 
older reported heavy 
alcohol consumption 
Greater than 140,000 
people died from 
alcohol related 
causes 2015-2019
Alcohol contributed 
7% of ED visits and 
17% of opioid 
overdoses
--- Page 11 ---
A chronic, relapsing brain disorder characterized by an impaired ability to stop or 
control alcohol use despite adverse social, occupational, or health consequences 
Ranges from mild to severe
Recovery is always possible
Includes alcohol abuse and alcohol dependence 
--- Page 12 ---
3.4% of 12 
to 17 yr olds
11.3 % of 18 
yrs and older
--- Page 13 ---
26477807
In 2010, alcohol misuse cost the United States $249 billion.1
Three quarters of the total cost of alcohol misuse is related to binge drinking.1
Reference
Sacks JJ, Gonzales KR, Bouchery EE, Tomedi LE, Brewer RD. 2010 national and state costs of 
excessive alcohol consumption. Am J Prev Med. 2015;49(5):e73 -e79. PubMed PMID: 26477807
--- Page 14 ---
Substance Signs Dysfunctional Behaviors
Alcohol
Unsteady gait, slurred 
speech, nystagmus, 
flushed face, conjunctival 
injection, decreased 
levels of consciousness
Disinhibition, 
argumentativeness, 
aggression, inattention, 
lability of mood, impaired 
judgement and functioning
--- Page 15 ---
Alcohol poisoning can result from drinking 
any type of alcohol, including beer, wine 
or liquor. As your stomach digests and 
absorbs alcohol, the alcohol enters your 
bloodstream, and your alcohol blood level 
begins to rise. Your liver breaks down 
alcohol. But when blood alcohol levels are 
high, your overwhelmed liver can’t 
remove the toxins quickly enough.
The extra alcohol in the bloodstream is a 
depressant. That means it reduces normal 
function. In this case, it affects the parts of 
the brain that control vital body functions, 
such as breathing, heart rate, blood 
pressure and temperature. As blood 
alcohol continues to rise, the depressant 
effect is more substantial
--- Page 16 ---
Hypothermia
incontinence
Seizures
Bluish-colored or cold, 
clammy skin, especially 
around the lips and 
fingernails.
Confusion, slowed 
responses, lack of 
coordination or being 
unable to walk.
Difficulty remaining 
conscious.
 Hypothermia.
Irregular pulse, 
heartbeat or breathing 
(intervals of 10 seconds 
or more between 
breaths).
Problems with bladder 
or bowel control 
(incontinence).
Seizures, vomiting or 
choking.
 Strong alcohol odor
--- Page 17 ---
Breathalyzer: As you drink, the alcohol goes through your 
bloodstream to your lungs. There, it evaporates into the lungs, and 
you breathe it out. As you blow into the breathalyzer, it can 
estimate your BAC by how much alcohol it detects in your breath.
Blood test: A lab technician draws a small amount of 
blood with a needle. The technician then analyzes for the 
BAC. The blood test is most accurate within six to 12 
hours after the last drink you consume.
--- Page 18 ---
Management of Alcohol Poisoning
--- Page 19 ---
May occur within hours, peaks at 72 hours, results in the 
absence of GABAergic input of alcohol
May include tremors, insomnia, agitation, diaphoresis, 
hypertension, tachycardia or seizures
Hallucinations may occur and signal alcohol withdrawal 
DELERIUM (2% of patients)
Any history of previous withdrawal from alcohol that includes 
delirium or seizures should be treated in a monitored setting
--- Page 20 ---
https://exchange.scholarrx.com
/brick/1z050x1oy5dv
--- Page 21 ---
Tobacco use disorder
Neurotransmitter Effect
Dopamine Pleasure, appetite suppression
Norepinephrine Arousal, appetite suppression
Acetylcholine Arousal, cognitive enhancement
Glutamate Learning, memory enhancement
Serotonin Mood modulation, appetite suppression
β-Endorphin Reduction in anxiety and tension
GABA Reduction in anxiety and tension
• Main effects of neurotransmitters 
that are released by nicotine binding. 
GABA, γ-aminobutyric acid 
• Adapted from reference 18: Benowitz. 
Clinical pharmacology of nicotine: 
implications for understanding, 
preventing, and treating tobacco 
addiction. Clin Pharmacol 
Ther. 2008;83(4):531-541.
--- Page 22 ---
Nicotine withdrawal
• The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) reports 7 
primary symptoms associated with nicotine withdrawal: 
irritability/anger/frustration, anxiety, depressed mood, difficulty 
concentrating, increased appetite, insomnia, and restlessness
• There are seven FDA-approved medications for smoking cessation, including 
two non-nicotine replacement pill options of bupropion (Zyban) and 
varenicline (Chantix) and five nicotine-replacement therapies (NRTs).
• Varenicline (Chantix) appears to be the most effective compared with 
placebo, followed by bupropion and NRTs.Varenicline is a partial agonist at 
the α4β2 receptors; as a partial agonist, it relieves craving and withdrawal, 
but reduces the reinforcing effects of nicotine by blocking dopaminergic 
stimulation (less smoking reinforcement/reward).
• Bupropion (Zyban) is the other medication that can affect dopamine, 
norepinephrine, and nicotinic-cholinergic receptors to decrease cravings and 
withdrawal symptoms.
• NRTs function to satisfy nicotine receptors while being less reinforcing.
--- Page 23 ---
• https://exchange.scholar
rx.com/brick/tobacco-
smoking
--- Page 24 ---
Cannabis use 
disorder
• The acute phase includes 
intoxication and withdrawal 
states, along with secondary 
complications - delirium, 
psychosis, anxiety, and insomnia. 
Chronic regular use can be 
characterized by disordered 
behavior (DMS 5)

--- Page 25 ---
Cannabis 
intoxication
Specify if perceptual disturbances are present: hallucinations with intact reality testing or 
auditory, visual, or tactile illusions occur in the absence of delirium.
Symptoms not due to a general medical condition and are not better accounted for by 
another mental disorder .
At least two of the following signs, developing within 2 hours of cannabis use: 
conjunctival injection, increased appetite, dry mouth, tachycardia.
Clinically significant problematic behavioral or psychological changes (e.g., impaired 
motor coordination, euphoria, anxiety, a sensation of slowed time, impaired judgment, 
social withdrawal) that developed during, or shortly after, cannabis use 
Recent use of cannabis 
--- Page 26 ---
Cannabis 
withdrawal
This accompanies cessation of cannabis use that has been heavy and 
prolonged (i.e., usually daily or almost daily use over a period of at least a few 
months). Three or more of the following signs and symptoms develop within 
approximately 1 week after cessation of heavy, prolonged use: 
• Irritability, anger, or aggression 
• Nervousness or anxiety 
• Sleep difficulty (i.e., insomnia, disturbing dreams) 
• Decreased appetite or weight loss 
• Restlessness 
• Depressed mood 
At least one of the following physical symptoms causing significant discomfort: 
abdominal pain, shakiness/tremors, sweating, fever , chills, or a headache. 
The signs or symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in 
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning. 
The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and 
are not better explained by another mental disorder , including intoxication or 
withdrawal from another substance.
--- Page 27 ---
• https://exchange.scholarrx.com/brick/canna
bis-use-disorder
--- Page 28 ---
Opioid use disorder
natural: from the poppy plant/morphine & codeine
semi synthetic: heroine, oxycodone, hydrocodone
synthetic: fentanyl, methadone, tramadol
0.37% of adults 18 
yrs and older
Usually starts in 
late teens/early 
twenties
Genetic factors 
play a particularly 
important role
At risk for TB, HIV, 
endocarditis, 
cellulitis, hepatitis
--- Page 29 ---
• Fentanyl is 50 times more potent 
than heroin and 100 times more 
potent than morphine
--- Page 30 ---
Recent use of an opioid.
B. Clinically significant 
problematic behavioral 
or psychological changes 
(e.g., initial euphoria 
followed by apathy, 
dysphoria, psychomotor 
agitation or retardation, 
impaired judgment) that 
developed during, or 
shortly after, opioid use.
C. Pupillary constriction 
(or pupillary dilation due 
to anoxia from severe 
overdose) and one (or 
more) of the following 
signs or symptoms 
developing during, or 
shortly after, opioid use: 
1. Drowsiness or coma. 
2. Slurred speech. 3. 
Impairment in attention 
or memory.
D. The signs or 
symptoms are not 
attributable to another 
medical condition and 
are not better explained 
by another mental 
disorder , including 
intoxication with another 
substance.
--- Page 31 ---
• M:miosis
• O:out of it (sedation)
• R: respiratory depression
• P:pneumonia (aspiration)
• H: hypotension
• I: infrequency (constipation and urinary retention)
• N: nausea
• E: emesis
--- Page 32 ---
A. Presence of either of the following: 1. Cessation of (or reduction in) opioid use that has been heavy 
and prolonged (i.e., several weeks or longer). 2. Administration of an opioid antagonist after a period 
of opioid use.
B. Three (or more) of the following developing within minutes to several days after Criterion A: 1. 
Dysphoric mood. Nausea or vomiting. Muscle aches. Lacrimation or rhinorrhea. Pupillary dilation, 
piloerection, or sweating. Diarrhea. Yawning. Fever. Insomnia.
C. The signs or symptoms in Criterion B cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, 
occupational, or other important areas of functioning. 
D. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are not better 
explained by another mental disorder , including intoxication or withdrawal from another 
substance.
--- Page 33 ---
                                                                                                          
Methadone is an opioid agonist/eliminates 
withdrawal and reduces cravings                                
                                                                                                                             
Buprenorphine is a partial opioid agonist/reduces 
withdrawal and cravings
                                                                                                                             
Naltrexone is an opioid antagonist/prevent 
opioids from producing rewarding effects
                                                                      
Methadone=Buprenorphine>naltrexone
                                                                                                    
All are more effective with counseling/behavioral 
therapy
Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
--- Page 34 ---
https://exchange.scholarrx.com/brick/o
pioid-use-disorder

--- Page 35 ---
PCP-PHENCYCLIDINE                    KETAMINE               MESCALINE
LSD-D-4LYSERIC ACID DIETHYLAMIDE         PSILOCYBIN              BATH SALTS
DXM-DEXTROMETHORPHAN               SALVIA DIVINORUM        ECSTASY
--- Page 36 ---
A. Recent use of 
phencyclidine (or a 
pharmacologically similar 
substance).
B. Clinically significant 
problematic behavioral 
changes (e.g., belligerence, 
assaultiveness, 
impulsiveness, 
unpredictability, 
psychomotor agitation, 
impaired judgment) that 
developed during, or 
shortly after, phencyclidine 
use.
C. Within 1 hour, two (or 
more) of the following 
signs or symptoms: Note: 
When the drug is smoked, 
“snorted, ” or used 
intravenously, the onset 
may be particularly rapid. 
1. Vertical or horizontal 
nystagmus. 2. 
Hypertension or 
tachycardia. Numbness or 
diminished responsiveness 
to pain. Ataxia. Dysarthria. 
Muscle rigidity. Seizures or 
coma. Hyperacusis.
D. The signs or symptoms 
are not attributable to 
another medical condition 
and are not better 
explained by another 
mental disorder, including 
intoxication with another 
substance
--- Page 37 ---
Recent intended or 
unintended short-term, 
high-dose exposure to 
inhalant substances, 
including volatile 
hydrocarbons such as 
toluene or gasoline.
B. Clinically significant 
problematic behavioral or 
psychological changes 
(e.g., belligerence, 
assaultiveness, apathy, 
impaired judgment) that 
developed during, or 
shortly after, exposure to 
inhalants.
C. Two (or more) of the 
following signs or 
symptoms developing 
during, or shortly after, 
inhalant use or exposure: 
Dizziness. Nystagmus. 
Incoordination. Slurred 
speech. Unsteady gait. 
Lethargy. Depressed 
reflexes. Psychomotor 
retardation. Tremor. 
Generalized muscle 
weakness.  Blurred vision 
or diplopia. Stupor or 
coma. Euphoria.
D. The signs or symptoms 
are not attributable to 
another medical condition 
and are not better 
explained by another 
mental disorder, including 
intoxication with another 
substance.
--- Page 38 ---
A. Recent use of a sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic.
B. Clinically significant maladaptive behavioral or psychological changes (e.g., 
inappropriate sexual or aggressive behavior, mood lability, impaired judgment) that 
developed during, or shortly after, sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use.
C. One (or more) of the following signs or symptoms developing during, or shortly 
after, sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use: Slurred speech. Incoordination. Unsteady 
gait. Nystagmus. Impairment in cognition (e.g., attention, memory). Stupor or coma.
D. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are 
not better explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication with another 
substance.
Differentiate from alcohol intoxication
--- Page 39 ---
A. Cessation of (or reduction 
in) sedative, hypnotic, or 
anxiolytic use that has been 
prolonged. 
B. Two (or more) of the 
following, developing within 
several hours to a few days 
after the cessation of (or 
reduction in) sedative, 
hypnotic, or anxiolytic use 
described in Criterion A: 1. 
Autonomic hyperactivity 
(e.g., sweating or pulse rate 
greater than 100 bpm). 2. 
Hand tremor. Insomnia. . 
Nausea or vomiting. . 
Transient visual, tactile, or 
auditory hallucinations or 
illusions. . Psychomotor 
agitation. Anxiety. . Grand 
mal seizures. 
C. The signs or symptoms in 
Criterion B cause clinically 
significant distress or 
impairment in social, 
occupational, or other 
important areas of 
functioning. 
D. The signs or symptoms are 
not attributable to another 
medical condition and are not 
better explained by another 
mental disorder, including 
intoxication or withdrawal 
from another substance.
--- Page 40 ---

--- Page 41 ---
A. Recent use of an amphetamine -type substance, cocaine, or other stimulant.
B. Clinically significant problematic behavioral or psychological changes (e.g., euphoria or affective blunting; changes in s ociability; 
hypervigilance; interpersonal sensitivity; anxiety, tension, or anger; stereotyped behaviors; impaired judgment) that develop ed during, or shortly 
after , use of a stimulant.
C. Two (or more) of the following signs or symptoms, developing during, or shortly after, stimulant use: Tachycardia or brady cardia. Pupillary 
dilation. Elevated or lowered blood pressure. Perspiration or chills. Nausea or vomiting. Evidence of weight loss. Psychomoto r agitation or 
retardation. Muscular weakness, respiratory depression, chest pain, or cardiac arrhythmias. Confusion, seizures, dyskinesias,  dystonias, or coma.
D. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are not better explained by another mental dis order , including 
intoxication with another substance.
Chest pain, palpitations are a frequent presenting symptom.
--- Page 42 ---
A. Cessation of (or reduction in) prolonged amphetamine-type substance, cocaine, or other 
stimulant use. 
B. Dysphoric mood and two (or more) of the following physiological changes, developing 
within a few hours to several days after Criterion A: Fatigue. Vivid, unpleasant dreams. 
Insomnia or hypersomnia. Increased appetite. Psychomotor retardation or agitation. 
C. The signs or symptoms in Criterion B cause clinically significant distress or impairment in 
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
D. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are not 
better explained by another mental disorder , including intoxication or withdrawal from 
another substance.
--- Page 43 ---
Resources 
for 
providers 
and 
patients
• SAMHSA’s National Helpline at 1-800-662-
HELP (substance abuse and mental health 
services admin)
• https://findtreatment.gov/
• https://www.cdc.gov/
• https://www.cdc.gov/drugoverdose/
• Oasas.ny.gov for naloxone samples and 
training
• Summary of the 2022 Clinical Practice 
Guideline for Prescribing Opioids for Pain
• PMP – mandatory checking before 
prescribing
--- Page 44 ---
Lecture and Lab Feedback Form:
https://comresearchdata.nyit.edu/redcap/surveys/?s=HRCY448FWYXREL4R
