--- Page 1 ---
Pharmacology of Antiseizure Drugs, Part 2:
Broad spectrum ASDs, 
ASDs that act on other molecular targets
Leslie Goldstein, Pharm.D.
Associate Professor 
Division of Pharmacology
Department of Clinical Specialties
lgolds01@nyit.edu

--- Page 2 ---
I am available to groups and individuals for pharmacology 
help and discussions by appointment.
lgolds01@nyit.edu
--- Page 3 ---
1. Explain the various mechanisms of antiseizure drug action at the levels of specific 
ion channels and neurotransmitter systems.
2. Describe the main pharmacokinetic features of the antiepileptic drugs and their 
metabolic- and transport-related drug interactions.
3. Compare and contrast the drugs used in the treatment of focal onset seizures, 
generalized onset seizures, various epileptic syndromes, and status epilepticus by 
giving specific examples.
4. Correlate the adverse effects of the drugs covered in this lecture (the “starred 
drugs”) with their mechanisms of action
5. Explain the meaning and clinical relevance of HLA genetic polymorphisms on 
adverse event risk.
6. Apply the distinctive class and drug-specific toxicities to the selection of 
antiepileptic therapy for the individual patients, including children, adults, pregnant 
patients, and older patients.
After completing the preparation materials for the Pharmacology of 
Antiseizure Drugs, students should be able to:
3
--- Page 4 ---
Required
• ScholarRx Bricks  Practice Questions and Clinical Vignettes
Highly relevant optional materials:
• Dr. Goldstein’s Word handout  Video Lecture Guided Reading Questions
• Textbook resources with links are listed on the next slide
Preparation Materials (links are in the CPG and on the next slide)
SUGGESTIONS: 
• Use the resources that work best for you. 
• You do not need to study all of them. 
• Work through the GUIDED READING QUESTIONS with pen/pencil and paper. 
Try answering them in your OWN WORDS first without looking at the readings, and 
then again after reviewing.
• Practice questions (not graded): Simple Recall and Case Vignettes
4
--- Page 5 ---
ScholarRx
• Neurology and Special Senses > Seizures
• Definitions, Pathophysiology, Diagnosis, Treatment: Seizures and Epilepsy: 
https://exchange.scholarrx.com/brick/seizures-and-epilepsy 
• Pharmacology:  Drugs to Treat Seizures: https://exchange.scholarrx.com/brick/drugs-to-treat-seizures 
Access Medicine Katzung’s Basic & Clinical Pharmacology, 16e, 2024: Chapter 24: Antiseizure Drug
https://nyit.idm.oclc.org/login?url=https://accessmedicine-mhmedical-
com.nyit.idm.oclc.org/content.aspx?bookid=3382&sectionid=281750501 
Review resources with practice questions:
Access Medicine Katzung’s Pharmacology: Examination & Board Review, 14e, 2024: Chapter 24: Antiseizure Drugs
https://nyit.idm.oclc.org/login?url=https://accessmedicine-mhmedical-
com.nyit.idm.oclc.org/content.aspx?bookid=3461&sectionid=285593532 
LWW Health Libraries, Premier Basic Sciences: Lippincott’s Illustrated Reviews: Pharmacology 8e, 2023; Chapter 19: 
Drugs for Epilepsy
https://nyit.idm.oclc.org/login?url=https://premiumbasicsciences-lwwhealthlibrary-
com.nyit.idm.oclc.org/content.aspx?sectionid=253327374&bookid=3222
Links to Resources
5
--- Page 6 ---
6
ASDs with Multiple Mechanisms of Action
Valproate / Divalproex sodium
Topiramate
• Zonisamide (not included in this lecture)
Broad Spectrum ASDs
--- Page 7 ---
7
 Valproate
 Divalproex sodium
(valproic acid-valproate sodium complex)
short branched-chain fatty acid
--- Page 8 ---
8
• Oral; I.V.
• Protein binding 80-92% (saturable, concentration-dependent) 
• Hepatic metabolism:
– mitochondrial -oxidation
– glucuronide conjugation
– other pathways via several CYPs to a lesser extent
• Bioavailability ~90%
• t½ varies: 
adults 9-16h
children 7-13h
prolonged in neonates and patients with liver disease
Pharmacokinetics of Valproate
Main metabolic pathways
What is the take-away? Monitor blood levels of the drug. 
--- Page 9 ---
9
1. VG Na+ channel block suppresses high -frequency, repetitive neuronal firing
(different sites than phenytoin and carbamazepine) 
2. Reductions in voltage-gated T-type Ca2+ currents
3. Increases GABA concentrations, stimulates GABA synthesis, and inhibits GABA 
degradation
Other potential actions observed in experimental systems.
The relevance of these actions to antiseizure activity is not established.
Valproic acid: 
Multiple cellular mechanisms observed in model systems
--- Page 10 ---
10
Monotherapy or adjunctive therapy in:
• Focal-onset seizures 
• Generalized-onset tonic-clonic seizures
• Absence seizures, simple or complex
– Valproic acid and ethosuximide are first-line agents
• Myoclonic epilepsy syndromes / Atonic seizures
• Status epilepticus (valproate I.V., off-label alternative)
Non-seizure applications: 
• Acute mania associated with bipolar disorder
• Migraine acute treatment and prophylaxis
Valproate is considered 
first-line for treating a range of seizure types in adults and children
Takeaway:
Valproate is useful for 
many seizure types and 
it has non-seizure 
applications.
--- Page 11 ---
11
• Common: 
– nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain and heartburn (gradually titrate dose)
– sedation, dizziness, ataxia, cognitive impairment 
• Tremor, hair loss, and weight gain (4-9% of patients) 
• Hepatotoxicity (range: from an  in LFTs to fulminant liver failure and death)
• Hematological: Thrombocytopenia / Reduced platelet function
• Hyperammonemia / encephalopathy (related to inhibition of mitochondrial carbamoyl 
phosphate synthase necessary for ammonia elimination; dose-dependent effect)
• Acute pancreatitis, rare (US Boxed Warning)
• Hypersensitivity reactions: Rash, SJS, TEN, DRESS
➢ Caution: Patients with hereditary neurometabolic syndromes caused by mitochondrial 
DNA polymerase gamma (POLG) gene mutations are at increased risk of acute liver 
failure and death – valproate is contraindicated
Valproate Adverse Effects (not a complete list)
--- Page 12 ---
12
PREGNANCY: Teratogenic
Neural tube defects (spina bifida)
Craniofacial defects (eg, cleft palate)
Cardiovascular malformations
Other body malformations
Lower cognitive test scores
Neurodevelopmental defects
DRUG INTERACTIONS: 
Valproate inhibits  the metabolism of 
many drugs, including lamotrigine, 
phenobarbital, and ethosuximide → may 
increase the serum levels of the drugs.
Lamotrigine: 
➢ Practice point: Slow titration of 
lamotrigine dose when added to 
valproate therapy
Valproate: additional cautions
--- Page 13 ---
13
Topiramate

--- Page 14 ---
14
Favorable PK profile:
• good absorption
• good bioavailability
• low plasma protein binding
• minor non-CYP hepatic metabolism
• renal excretion ~70% unchanged 
• may undergo proximal tubule 
reabsorption → t½ 20-30h
Antiseizure effects are likely due to  a 
combination of actions
• VG Na+ channel inhibition
• Depresses glutamate AMPA/kainite 
excitatory action
• Enhances GABAA inhibitory effect
• Carbonic anhydrase inhibition 
(weak) – antiseizure relevance 
unknown
Topiramate
Pharmacokinetics Mechanisms
--- Page 15 ---
15
Seizure applications
• Focal-onset seizures 
• Generalized-onset tonic-clonic 
seizures
• Lennox-Gastaut syndrome (adjunctive 
therapy)
• May be effective in other childhood 
seizure types
Topiramate Therapeutic uses in adults and children
Non-seizure applications: 
• Prophylaxis of migraine and cluster 
headaches
• Weight loss 
(in fixed-combination with phenteramine, a 
sympathomimetic similar to amphetamine)
• Binge eating disorder
• Alcohol use disorder
• and others
--- Page 16 ---
Topiramate: Adverse Effects and Cautions
Common
• Somnolence, fatigue, dizziness, cognitive slowing, paresthesia, 
nervousness, moodiness, and confusion 
• Weight loss reported
Carbonic 
anhydrase 
inhibition
Children are most vulnerable to the following effects:
• Metabolic acidosis:  serum HCO3- due to renal HCO3- loss
• Bone loss / reduced growth
• Reduced sweating / Hyperthermia: 
normal heat-related perspiration becomes severely impaired; children 
especially susceptible
• Renal calculus:  increase the risk of kidney stones (low incidence)
16
--- Page 17 ---
Topiramate: Pregnancy and Drug Interactions
Pregnancy
Adverse effects in animal reproduction studies 
• May cause fetal harm: oral clefts reported
• Consider alternative medication for patients who wish to become 
pregnant. 
• Effective contraception recommended for people who or reproductive 
potential who are not planning to become pregnant.
• Pregnant women and newborns should be monitored for metabolic 
acidosis, which may be induced by topiramate.
Drug 
Interactions
• Enzyme inducers increase clearance
• Concurrent use of topiramate and valproic acid may increase the risk of 
hyperammonemia and associated encephalopathy.
• CNS depressant effects of other drugs may enhance topiramate’s 
depressant effects.
17
--- Page 18 ---
Thinking of valproate’s mechanisms, therapeutic uses, and side effects, what are three takeaways 
regarding valproate?
• Valproate has multiple mechanisms of action.
• Valproate is a broad-spectrum ASD and first-line therapy in a range of seizure types in adults 
and children and has non-seizure applications (acute mania in biopolar disorder; migraine).
• Valproate has numerous and common GI and CNS side effects, tremor, hair loss, and weight 
gain. It can cause decreased platelet function, hyperammonemia, hepatotoxicity, and 
hypersensitivity reactions.
Questions
18
Thinking of topiramate’s mechanisms, therapeutic uses, and side effects, what are three 
takeaways regarding topiramate?
• Topiramate has multiple mechanisms of action.
• Topiramate is a broad-spectrum ASD and used in a range of seizure types for adults and 
children. Topiramate has several non-seizure uses (weight loss, migraine prevention, and 
more).
• Topiramate has numerous and common CNS side effects. As a weak carbonic anhydrase 
inhibitor, it can cause decreased sweating and hyperthermia in children, reduced growth in 
children, and metabolic acidosis. Kidney stones may occur. 
What about usage in pregnancy or individuals who may become pregnant?
• AVOID. Valproate is teratogenic. Topiramate may cause fetal harm.
--- Page 19 ---
19
ASDs that interact with other molecular targets
--- Page 20 ---
20
NMDA receptor blocker
and other mechanisms
Felbamate
For seizure disorders
refractory to other ASDs

--- Page 21 ---
Felbamate pharmacology
PK: 
excellent bioavailability
CYP3A4 metabolism
20-hr half-life (adults)
MOA: 
1. Use-dependent block of NMDA glutamate receptor
2. Potentiation of GABAA-mediated inhibitory effect
Therapeutic uses:
Seizure disorder refractory to other ASDs
 Informed consent must be obtained
• Focal-onset seizures with or without 
generalization
• Seizures of Lennox-Gestaut syndrome
High rates of fatal aplastic anemia 
and hepatitis failure compared with 
those treated with other ASDs.
• GI / CNS side effects
• DDIs: 
CYP3A4, CNS depressants
21
--- Page 22 ---
22
Inhibitors of 
Voltage-Sensitive 
Ca2+ Channels 
In Cortical Neurons
Gabapentinoids:
Gabapentin
• Pregabalin
 GABA analogs:
amino acid-like molecules
related to GABA
-aminobutyric acid (GABA)

--- Page 23 ---
23
ADVERSE EFFECTS
– Sedation; dizziness; weight gain; 
peripheral edema
FDA warning: Respiratory depression; 
increased risk with opioids, CNS 
depressants; elderly
PREGNANCY
• Adverse events observed in animal 
reproduction studies
• Pregnancy registry outcome data is 
limited
DRUG INTERACTIONS
• No known metabolic interactions
Gabapentin / Pregabalin
The precise mechanism for the gabapentinoids’ actions is not known.
PK: Uptake via L-amino acid transporter 
(saturable)
Not metabolized
Renal excretion 100% unchanged
Nonseizure: Neuropathic pain and several 
other off-label uses
MOA: Block α2δ subunit on VG Ca2+ channel 
on presynaptic neuron → may  synaptic 
release of excitatory neurotransmitters
May involve other mechanisms.
USES: 
Focal-onset seizures (adjuncts)
Nonseizure: Neuropathic pain, restless legs 
syndrome, hot flashes of menopause, and 
many other uses
--- Page 24 ---
24
Synaptic Vesicle Proteins (SV2A)
Levetiracetam
• Brivaracetam

--- Page 25 ---
25
PK:
• oral, 100% bioavailability
• I.V.
• nonhepatic hydrolysis
• renal, unchanged drug 
• t½ ~7h (2x daily dosing)
• TU: broad spectrum
Adjunctive use
– Focal-onset seizures
– Generalized-onset tonic-clonic 
seizures
– Myoclonic seizures
• AE: Mild-moderate, often subside
– Fatigue, irritability, somnolence, 
dizziness
– Psychotic symptoms
• DDI: Low potential for metabolic drug 
interactions
Levetiracetam pharmacology
Drug binding to SV2A appears to 
reduce the synaptic release of 
glutamate and GABA.
--- Page 26 ---
26
Suppressors of T-Type Ca2+ Currents
Ethosuximide (narrow spectrum)  
Valproate (broad spectrum)
--- Page 27 ---
27
Ethosuximide
A cyclic succinimide
--- Page 28 ---
28
Pharmacokinetics Oral
CYP3A4 metabolism
Renal excretion of metabolites (small amount unchanged) 
t½ 50-60 h (adults), 30 h children
Mechanism of action See next slide
Therapeutic use Absence seizures
Adverse effects Most common:
Nausea and vomiting
somnolence, sleep disturbance, hyperactivity 
Drug interactions CYP3A4-mediated
Ethosuximide does not induce or inhibit metabolic enzymes
➢ Practice point: Ethosuximide is often given 2 to 3 times daily to reduce GI side effects.
Ethosuximide pharmacology
--- Page 29 ---
29
Top: Goodman & Gilman 14e Figure 20 -2
Bottom: © 2023 UptoDate Graphic 91022 v. 2.0
Ethosuximide reduces low-threshold Ca2+ 
currents (T-type currents) in thalamocortical 
neurons → 
• suppresses paroxysmal 3Hz spike -and-wave 
pattern in absence seizures
3 hertz means the waveform repeats 3 times in 1 second.
• depresses nerve transmission in the motor 
cortex and increases seizure threshold
Ethosuximide Mechanism of Action

--- Page 30 ---
A particular broad-spectrum ASD that inhibits NMDA and potentiates GABA at GABAA receptors is 
used only in refractory seizures, such as Lennox-Gastaut syndrome. Informed consent is required. 
Why?
• Felbamate is associated with a high rates of fatal aplastic anemia and hepatic failure compared 
with patients taking other ASDs.
A particular class of drugs that acts at a presynaptic site is used for neuropathic pain, a number of 
other nonseizure uses, and as add-on therapy for management of focal seizures. What is its 
mechanistic target?
• Gapapentinoids block the α2δ subunit on VG Ca2+ channel on presynaptic neuron, which may 
decrease synaptic release of excitatory neurotransmitters.
A broad spectrum ASD with 100% bioavailability, nonhepatic metabolism, renal excretion of 
unchanged drug has mild-moderate side effects and low potential for drug interactions. What are 
the drug and the mechanistic target?
• Levetiracetam blocks SV2A, which may prevent docking of the vesicle and release of the 
neurotransmitter.
What are the most common side effects of the narrow spectrum drug for absence seizures?
• Nausea and vomiting. somnolence, sleep disturbance, hyperactivity (CYP3A4 DDIs)
Questions
30
--- Page 31 ---
31
Enhancing Synaptic GABA Activity
GABAA receptor positive allosteric modulators
Phenobarbital
• Primidone
Benzodiazepines
• Cenobamate 
(and preferential inhibition of persistent sodium current, INaP)

--- Page 32 ---
32
Phenobarbital
Primidone 
Phenobarbital and primidone are used less often for epilepsy than in the 
past due to the high incidence of adverse effects (chronic sedative 
effects).

--- Page 33 ---
Pharmacokinetics: Phenobarbital and Primidone
Phenobarbital Primidone
A Oral (good bioavailability); I.V.; I.M.
I.V. onset of action  ~5 minutes
Oral only, 90-100% bioavailability
D Protein binding ~50% bound
Vd is larger in neonates and infants than in 
older individuals
Protein binding ~30%
M Hepatic  via CYP2C9 Hepatic to phenobarbital and PEMA*
All 3 compounds are active
Phenobarbital and primidone (and all other barbiturates) are strong inducers
of CYP1A2, 2B6, 2C8/9, 3A4, UGT, and P-glycoprotein
E Renal 25-50% unchanged Renal unchanged drug, phenobarbital, and 
PEMA*
t½ 1½-5 days in adults
Less in infants and children
Primidone 5-15 hours; PEMA 16 hours
Age-dependent
*PEMA: phenylethylmalonamide 33
--- Page 34 ---
34
Therapeutic uses:
• Focal-onset seizures
• Generalized tonic-clonic seizures 
(especially children)
• Status epilepticus (alternative)
Phenobarbital: GABAA receptor positive allosteric modulator
• Barbiturates bind to allosteric site on both  and  
subunits; 
prolong duration of the channel openings permitting 
Cl- influx and hyperpolarization → enhanced GABA-
mediated inhibition 
• High-doses: Barbiturates also have GABA -mimetic 
activity (direct stimulation of GABA A receptors)
Katzung Figure 22-6: A model of the GABAA 
receptor-chloride ion channel macromolecular 
complex
--- Page 35 ---
35
• Sedation
• Depression of mood
• Cognitive impairment
• Hyperactivity particularly in children 
and patients in acute pain
• Agitation, confusion in elderly
• Porphyrias (barbiturates can 
precipitate symptoms)
• Rash
• Hepatotoxicity
• Bone marrow toxicity
Intravenous
• Respiratory depression – esp 
when used after benzodiazepine
• Hypotension
Phenobarbital Adverse Effects
POTENT INDUCER of CYPs
Positive evidence of human fetal risk
--- Page 36 ---
36
Antiseizure Benzodiazepines
Diazepam
seven member 
diazepine ring structure 
Diazepam Clonazepam
Lorazepam Clorazepate
Midazolam Clobazam
--- Page 37 ---
Pharmacokinetics of Benzodiazepines
Diazepam Lorazepam Midazolam
A IV, IM, rectal, intranasal, oral IV,IM, oral, sublingual IV, IM, intranasal, buccal
Onset Immediate (I.V.) 5-10 min (I.V.) IV 3-5 min, IM ~15 min
Duration of 
antiseizure 
effect
15-30 min 6-8 hours IV <2 h, IM up to 6 h
M CYP2C19, 3A4, active 
metabolite, glucuronidation
glucuronide conjugation CYP3A4, active metabolites
E Urine, 
glucuronide metabolites
Urine, 
glucuronide metabolites
Urine, metabolites
t½ Diazepam: ~40 hours 
Nordiazepam ≥3 days
~20 hours (adults) 2-7 h
Note: Diazepam accumulates with multiple dosing and the t½terminal is slightly 
prolonged as the drug moves out of fat stores. 37
--- Page 38 ---
Diazepam: Rapid Termination of Effect by Redistribution
A single bolus dose of diazepam has a short duration of 
anti-seizure effect in status epilepticus, about 15-30 
minutes, despite its long half-life.
38
1) Diazepam is very lipid soluble so the initial rapid 
distribution of a single bolus dose into highly perfused 
CNS tissue produces an immediate effect.
• Then,
2) As plasma levels of drug decrease, diazepam moves 
down its concentration gradient out of the brain tissue 
terminating the effect of the single bolus dose.
• Diazepam rapidly redistributes into the less perfused 
muscle and fat tissues.

--- Page 39 ---
Citation: Chapter 22 Sedative-Hypnotic Drugs, Vanderah TW. Katzung’s Basic & Clinical Pharmacology, 16<sup>th</sup> Edition; 2024, Figure 22-6. Available at: 
https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=3382&sectionid=281750253 Accessed: January 24, 2024
Copyright © 2024 McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved
A model of the GABAA receptor–chloride ion channel macromolecular complex. A hetero-oligomeric glycoprotein, the complex consists of five or more membrane-spanning subunits. Multiple forms of α, β, 
and γ subunits are arranged in different pentameric combinations so that GABAA receptors exhibit molecular heterogeneity. GABA appears to interact at two sites between α and β subunits triggering chloride 
channel opening with resulting membrane hyperpolarization. Binding of benzodiazepines and the newer hypnotic drugs such as zolpidem occurs at a single site between α and γ subunits, facilitating the 
process of chloride ion channel opening. The benzodiazepine antagonist flumazenil also binds at this site and can reverse the hypnotic effects of zolpidem. Note that these binding sites are distinct from 
those of the barbiturates. (See also text and Box: The Versatility of the Chloride Channel GABA Receptor Complex.)
 Tolerance to the anticonvulsant effects of BZs 
develops within weeks to months, limiting their 
use (except in myoclonic seizures).
Benzodiazepines bind to allosteric sites
on GABAA receptor

increase the frequency of the 
channel openings permitting 
Cl- influx and hyperpolarization

enhanced GABA-mediated inhibition
Benzodiazepines: Positive Allosteric Modulators
Slide adapted by LG
--- Page 40 ---
Benzodiazepines therapeutic uses
40
Status epilepticus: 
Bolus dosing of benzodiazepines for initial 
treatment
Diazepam: 
• Immediate onset
• Short duration of action (15-30 min) is a 
disadvantage
Lorazepam: 
longer duration of antiseizure action (6-8 h)
Midazolam: 
IM, intranasal, buccal alternative if IV 
access not available
rapid onset; short t½elimination 2-7h
Chronic epilepsy management
Oral therapy
Clonazepam and Clorazepate: 
Lennox-Gastaut syndrome
Atonic and myoclonic seizures
Monotherapy or adjuncts with other ASDs
Clobazam: 
Lennox-Gastaut syndrome
Treatment-refractory seizures
Adjunctive use
Nonseizure applications
Anxiety; panic disorder; alcohol withdrawal; muscle 
relaxant (esp diazepam); sedative-hypnotic; preop 
sedation, anxiolysis, and amnesia; induction of 
anesthesia (balanced anesthesia); sedation for 
mechanically ventilated patients
--- Page 41 ---
41
Oral / rectal:
Sedation
Depression
Incoordination
Behavioral 
disturbances in 
children
Clobazam:
Severe skin reactions
Parenteral:
Acute hypotension
Ataxia 
Respiratory depression 
due to rapid rise in CNS 
concentrations
➢Gradually titrate to effect to avoid 
respiratory depression.
Caution: 
Benzodiazepines may produce 
withdrawal seizures upon 
discontinuation of the drug.
Drug interactions
Drugs with similar effects
Drugs that induce or inhibit hepatic 
enzymes
PREGNANCY
• Teratogenic effects observed (additional studies are 
needed)
• Hypoglycemia, respiratory problems
• Neonatal withdrawal symptoms
• Hypotonia: Floppy baby syndrome
Withdrawal symptoms may occur days to weeks after birth.
Benzodiazepines side effects and cautions
--- Page 42 ---
Cannabidiol (pharmaceutical)
[Epidiolex®]
42
--- Page 43 ---
Cannabidiol (pharmaceutical) pharmacology
PK: Oral, high protein 
binding, extensive 
distribution and hepatic 
metabolism CYP3A4, active 
metabolite, feces, t½ ~60 h
MOA: Unknown
May act on several endogenous systems
(It does not appear to directly activate CB1 or CB2 
receptors.)
Therapeutic uses:
• Seizures associated with Dravet 
syndrome, Lennox-Gestaut 
syndrome, or tuberous sclerosis 
complex in patients ≥1 year of age.
• Sedation, lethargy
• Elevated liver transaminases
DDIs: high potential
• Valproate: enhanced hepatotoxic effects
• CYP2C19: clobazam, citalopram, 
clopidogrel (antiplatelet drug)
• CYP3A4: numerous
• CNS depressants
43
--- Page 44 ---
What is the mechanism of action of GABAA receptor positive allosteric modulators?
• The drugs bind an allosteric site on the GABAA receptor and enhance the receptor’s 
inhibitory action by increasing chloride ion influx.
What drugs fall into this class?
• Benzodiazepines and barbiturates.
What are the first-line drugs for the treatment of status epilepticus?
• Lorazepam, diazepam, and midazolam
When treating status epilepticus, what drug-drug combination increases the risk of 
respiratory depression?
• Benzodiazepine with phenobarbital
What is the explanation for the short duration of a single bolus dose of diazepam?
• Termination of effect by redistribution out of CNS tissue into muscle and fat tissues.
What are the antiseizure indications for pharmaceutical cannabidiol?
• Seizures associated with Dravet syndrome, Lennox-Gestaut syndrome, or tuberous 
sclerosis complex in patients ≥1 year of age
Questions
44
--- Page 45 ---
Summary of Antiseizure Drugs
45
--- Page 46 ---
46
Summary: Molecular Targets of Antiseizure Drugs

--- Page 47 ---
Figure 1 Mechanisms of action of antiepileptic drugs
Modified with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd © Bialer, M. & White, H. S. 
Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 9, 68–82 (2010)
Löscher, W. & Schmidt, D. (2012) Perampanel—new promise for refractory epilepsy?
Nat. Rev. Neurol. doi:10.1038/nrneurol.2012.222
Inhibitory 
Synapse
Excitatory
Synapse
--- Page 48 ---
48
Drugs for Focal-Onset Seizures
Drugs for Focal-Onset Seizures
and Some Generalized-Onset 
Seizures
Lamotrigine
Lacosamide
Levetiracetam
Phenobarbital
Primidone
Felbamate
Perampanel
Carbamazepine
Oxazepine
Eslicarbazine
Phenytoin
Gabapentinoids
Cenobamate 
Drugs for Generalized-Onset 
Seizures
Valproate
Topiramate
Zonisamide
Drugs for Generalized Absence 
Seizures
Ethosuximide
Valproate
Drugs for Other Types of Seizures
Cannabidiol
(pharmaceutical)
Clobazam
Benzodiazepines
Rufinamide
Stiripentol
Fenfluramine
Benzodiazepines
Diazepam
Lorazepam
Midazolam
Clobazam
Clonazepam
Clorazepate
Drugs Effective for Seizures
--- Page 49 ---
49
Summary of Adverse Effects
Antiepileptic Drug Adverse Effects
Benzodiazepines Sedation, tolerance, dependence
Carbamazepine
Diplopia, cognitive dysfunction, ataxia; rare occurrence of severe 
blood dyscrasias and SJS/TEN/DRESS syndrome; hyponatremia; 
induces hepatic drug metabolism
Ethosuximide Nausea, lethargy, headache, dizziness
Felbamate Aplastic anemia, hepatic failure
Gabapentin Dizziness, sedation, ataxia, nystagmus; does not affect drug 
metabolism (pregabalin is similar)
--- Page 50 ---
50
Summary of Adverse Effects of Commonly Used ASDs
Antiepileptic Drug Adverse Effects
Lamotrigine Dizziness, ataxia, nausea, rash, rarely SJS/TEN; slow titration 
of dose to reduce risk of rash
Levetiracetam Dizziness, sedation, weakness, irritability, hallucinations, and 
psychosis have occurred
Oxcarbazepine Similar to carbamazepine, but hyponatremia is more common; 
fewer drug interactions
Phenobarbital Sedation, cognitive dysfunction, tolerance, dependence, 
induction of hepatic drug metabolism; primidone is similar
Phenytoin
Nystagmus, diplopia, sedation, gingival hyperplasia, hirsutism, 
anemias, peripheral neuropathy, SJS/TEN rarely; induction of 
hepatic drug metabolism
--- Page 51 ---
51
Summary of Adverse Effects
Antiepileptic Drug Adverse Effects
Tiagabine Abdominal pain, nausea, dizziness, tremor, asthenia; drug 
metabolism is not induced
Topiramate Drowsiness, dizziness, ataxia, psychomotor slowing and 
memory impairment; paresthesias, weight loss, acute myopia
Valproic acid Drowsiness, nausea, tremor, hair loss, weight gain, 
hepatotoxicity (infants), inhibition of drug metabolism
Vigabatrin Sedation, dizziness, weight gain; visual field defects/blindness 
with long-term use, which may not be reversible
Zonisamide Dizziness, confusion, agitation, diarrhea, weight loss, rash, 
Stevens-Johnson syndrome
--- Page 52 ---
Thinking of valproate’s mechanisms, therapeutic uses, and side effects, what are three takeaways 
regarding valproate?
• Valproate has multiple mechanisms of action.
• Valproate is a broad-spectrum ASD and first-line therapy in a range of seizure types in adults 
and children and has non-seizure applications (acute mania in biopolar disorder; migraine).
• Valproate has numerous and common GI and CNS side effects, tremor, hair loss, and weight 
gain. It can cause decreased platelet function, hyperammonemia, hepatotoxicity, and 
hypersensitivity reactions.
Questions
52
Thinking of topiramate’s mechanisms, therapeutic uses, and side effects, what are three 
takeaways regarding topiramate?
• Topiramate has multiple mechanisms of action.
• Topiramate is a broad-spectrum ASD and used in a range of seizure types for adults and 
children. Topiramate has several non-seizure uses (weight loss, migraine prevention, and 
more).
• Topiramate has numerous and common CNS side effects. As a weak carbonic anhydrase 
inhibitor, it can cause decreased sweating and hyperthermia in children, reduced growth in 
children, and metabolic acidosis. Kidney stones may occur. 
What about usage in pregnancy or individuals who may become pregnant?
• AVOID. Valproate is teratogenic. Topiramate may cause fetal harm.
--- Page 53 ---
A particular broad-spectrum ASD that inhibits NMDA and potentiates GABA at GABAA receptors is 
used only in refractory seizures, such as Lennox-Gastaut syndrome. Informed consent is required. 
Why?
• Felbamate is associated with a high rates of fatal aplastic anemia and hepatic failure compared 
with patients taking other ASDs.
A particular class of drugs that acts at a presynaptic site is used for neuropathic pain, a number of 
other nonseizure uses, and as add-on therapy for management of focal seizures. What is its 
mechanistic target?
• Gapapentinoids block the α2δ subunit on VG Ca2+ channel on presynaptic neuron, which may 
decrease synaptic release of excitatory neurotransmitters.
A broad spectrum ASD with 100% bioavailability, nonhepatic metabolism, renal excretion of 
unchanged drug has mild-moderate side effects and low potential for drug interactions. What are 
the drug and the mechanistic target?
• Levetiracetam blocks SV2A, which may prevent docking of the vesicle and release of the 
neurotransmitter.
What are the most common side effects of the narrow spectrum drug for absence seizures?
• Nausea and vomiting, somnolence, sleep disturbance, hyperactivity (CYP3A4 DDIs)
Questions
53
--- Page 54 ---
What is the mechanism of action of GABAA receptor positive allosteric modulators?
• The drugs bind an allosteric site on the GABAA receptor and enhance the receptor’s 
inhibitory action by increasing the frequency of channel opening →  chloride ion influx.
What drugs fall into this class?
• Benzodiazepines and barbiturates.
What are the first-line drugs for the treatment of status epilepticus?
• Lorazepam, diazepam, and midazolam
When treating status epilepticus, what drug-drug combination increases the risk of 
respiratory depression?
• Benzodiazepine with phenobarbital
What is the explanation for the short duration of a single bolus dose of diazepam?
• Termination of effect by redistribution out of CNS tissue into muscle and fat tissues.
What are the antiseizure indications for pharmaceutical cannabidiol?
• Seizures associated with Dravet syndrome, Lennox-Gestaut syndrome, or tuberous 
sclerosis complex in patients ≥1 year of age
Questions
54
--- Page 55 ---
Access Medicine Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine 21e, 2022; Chapter 425: Seizures and 
Epilepsy
Access Medicine Goodman & Gilman’s Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics 14e, 2023; 
Chapter 20: Pharmacotherapy of Epilepsies
Access Medicine Katzung’s Pharmacology Examination and Board Review, 14e, 2024; Chapter 
24: Antiseizure Drugs
Access Medicine Katzung’s Basic & Clinical Pharmacology, 16e, 2024; Chapter 24: Antiseizure 
Drugs
UpTodate Lexidrug monographs
UpToDate: various topics
Resources:
55
--- Page 56 ---
Lecture Feedback Form:
https://comresearchdata.nyit.edu/redcap/surveys/?s=HRCY448FWYXREL4R 
