Hello, I am Vladimir Grubišić and I am an assistant professor in the Department of Biomedical Sciences. This lecture is an overview of the Autonomic Nervous System or ANS. This system is important for maintaining body homeostasis. We will learn about the anatomy and physiology of the ANS and we will go over gross anatomy and functions, as well as some autonomic dysfunctions. The objectives of this session are to learn the neuroanatomy and neurotransmitters of the ANS, know and understand the actions of the two opposing branches of the ANS, sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems, learn about the enteric nervous system, comprehend autonomic reflexes and several autonomic disorders. Let's begin by talking about the organization of the nervous system. The nervous system is categorized by two major divisions the central and peripheral nervous systems. The central nervous system is grossly divided into six main parts and the peripheral nervous system consists of the autonomic and the somatic components. Today's session is on the ANS and its branches, sympathetic, parasympathetic and enteric nervous systems. Let's briefly talk about the nomenclature. Autonomic means self-governed, meaning that works independently from the higher voluntary brain centers. The ANS works involuntarily below our conscious thoughts to maintain homeostasis of fairly stable conditions that are necessary for survival. In other words, ANS is preparing our body respond to external stimuli. To keep this homeostasis, ANS is using negative feedback loops as shown here in this schematic. A solid line indicates the connected components are directly related, so an increase in one component leads to an increase in the connected component, while a decrease will lead to a decrease in the connected components. A dashed line, like one over here, indicates the connected components are inversely related. So an increase in one component leads to a decrease in components that are connected and vice versa. Negative feedback acts to maintain the control variable within a narrow range of values. For example when outside temperature is high our body starts to This heating is perceived by the sensory system which sends signals to the central control that compares it to the defined set point and in turn sends inhibitory signals to the centers that produce heat. Now, as the body temperature goes down, the sensor detects this temperature change and sends cooling signals to the center which then activates the heat centers. Now, the system with two effectors allows better or tighter control of the set temperature, as shown in this schematic. Negative feedback acts to maintain the room temperature within a narrow range of values, despite changes in the ambient temperature. for example the thermostat is set at 70 Fahrenheit and the change in the room temperature is picked up by the thermometer or sensor if the room temperature is above the set point thermostat activates the AC and turns off the furnace on other hand when the room temperature goes below the set point, the thermostat turns on the furnace and shuts off the AC. Now if you understand this cartoon you also understand the basic principle of the ANS control. The two branches of the ANS sympathetic and parasympathetic act as accelerators or brakes to keep the blood pressure at the defined set point we will talk about the baroreceptor reflex later in this session so just a brief overview increased blood pressure stretches the arterial walls and and baroreceptors within the blood vessel walls get activated and signals to the nucleus tractus solitarius that in turn inhibits sympathetic and activates parasympathetic efferents to reduce the cardiac output and total peripheral resistance resulting in the decreased blood pressure So, parasympathetic and sympathetic branches of the ANS keep this dynamic balance between the rest and digest and fight or flight. In general, the sympathetic system prepares a body for stressful response and the parasympathetic governs recovery from the stress. Autonomic control areas are found in the brainstem and hypothalamus. Feeding control, water balance and heat control are in the hypothalamus. The urinary bladder centers are in the midbrain and the cardiovascular centers in the pons and medulla omblogata. These centers control involuntary autonomic reflexes. They are also connected to higher centers in the cortex, which allows us to have conscious control over these circuits, for example, voluntary control over breathing. Here is a list of actions of these two ANS branches on several organs. Sympathetic is preparing our bodies for action or reaction to a stressful event, such as fight or flight. It increases blood circulation and oxygenation, redirects the blood flow from the periphery to the skeletal muscles, recruits energy from liver and adipose tissue, and shuts down processes that are less important during the stress response, such as digestive and urinary systems. Parasympathetic, on the other hand, is mediating opposing reactions that lead to recovery. This dual innervation provides more control over these involuntary responses. Once again, sympathetic system prepares us for fight or flight, and parasympathetic mediates rest and digest that is how you can describe most of their effects functions that do not fit these criteria are effects of the ans on external genitalia but there is another mnemonic to remember parasympathetic and sympathetic actions for ******** and ejaculation, and it is point and shoot. Please keep in mind that certain organs only receive sympathetic innervation. Here is a general overview of the similarities and differences between sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems. They both innervate internal organs of the head, neck and trunk as well as external genitalia. In addition, sympathetic nervous system also innervates the adrenal medulla, sweat glands, erector hair muscle and all vascular smooth muscle. Therefore, sympathetic system is distributed to all tissues, and parasympathetic doesn't reach limbs or body wall, with the exception of the external genitalia. Let's now briefly talk about ANS embryology. the peripheral part of the autonomic nervous system is derived from the neural crest in other words neural crest cells differentiate into all autonomic ganglia adrenal medulla and enteric nervous system we'll talk about this soon in more detail but what I would like you to pay your attention to is the adrenal medulla where neural crest cells differentiate into neuroendocrine chromaffin cells that release epinephrine and nor epinephrine let's talk about neural tube organization this schematic shows development of the neural tube the dorsal sensory and the ventral motor house are separated by this midline groove called sulcus limitants. Right above and below the sulcus are visceral sensory and motor neurons. In the spinal cord somatic motor nuclei make up the ventral horn while this part where the visceral motor nuclei are becomes intermedial lateral cell column. In the brace stem, the dorsal part of the neural tube opens up, so motor nerves are medial and the sensory are lateral. And here is the sulcus limitance that we talked about earlier. So here is an anatomical overview of the two opposing branches of the ANS. Sympathetic on the left and parasympathetic on the right. Both branches are composed of two neurons, presynaptic and postsynaptic neurons. Presynaptic sympathetic neuron bodies reside in the thoracolumbar segments of the spinal cord, while parasympathetic neurons are in the brainstem, so craniosacral regions of the CNS. Also this image shows that both pre- and post-synaptic neurons of the parasympathetic system are cholinergic, here shown in blue, which means that these neurons release a settled cholin. Sympathetic presynaptic neurons are also cholinergic, but post-synaptic neurons here shown in red are noradrenergic, meaning they release the noradrenaline. Now if we make slices through these regions and stain, we can see intermedial lateral column in the thoracolumbar region where the presynaptic neurons of the sympathetic nervous system reside. And in the brainstem, for example, we can see dorsal motor nucleosophagus, and it resides on the middle aspect of the sulcus limitants that we talked about earlier. In the sacral regions, this is how it looks like. We also find an intermedial lateral column where presynaptic neurons of parasympathetic system reside. Let's talk more about the cranial nerves that carry parasympathetic fibers. These nuclei contain the cell bodies of the preganglionic parasympathetic neurons and are labeled here with bold text. Other cranial nerves that are not involved in controlling the ANS are labeled gray. So for For instance, the Edinger-Westphal nucleus is in the midbrain and contains cell bodies of preganglionic fibers that travel with the cranial nerve 3. The superior salivatory nucleus is on the border of pons and medulla and contains cell bodies of preganglionic fibers that travel with cranial nerve 7. The inferior cellulatory nucleus is in the medulla and contains cell bodies of preganglionic fibers that travel with the cranial nerve 9. The nucleus ambiguous is in the medulla and the rostral portion of this nucleus contains preganglionic cell bodies that distribute with the cranial nerve 9. The rest of the nucleus amigus and the dorsal motor nucleus of vagus are also in medulla, containing cell bodies of preganglionic fibers that travel with cranial nerve 10, to host of terminal ganglia in the viscera of the thorax and abdomen. This schematic shows an autonomic innervation of the head and neck target tissues. And we can see where are the cranial nerve synapses. So cranial nerve 3 is synapses in ciliary ganglion, and postganglionic fibers innervate pupillary constrictor muscle and ciliary muscle. Cranial nerve 7 innervates lacrimal and naisal mucosal glands via pterygopalatin ganglion, and also inner with submandibular and sublingual glands through submandibular ganglion. Cranial nerve 9 innervates parotid gland via otic ganglion for here. Sympathetic innervation on the other hand for the head and neck tissue comes from the thoracic regions 1 and 2 via superior cervical ganglion and innervates pupillary dilator muscle, sweat glands, and vascular smooth muscle. Now if these sympathetic nerves get damaged anywhere along this axis, patients develop three signs such as droopy eyelid, constricted pupil, and sometimes loss of sweating on the same side of the face where the damage happen. Now let's talk about similarities and differences between the parasympathetic and sympathetic innervation. While somatic lower motor neuron directly innervate skeletal muscle shown here at the top, the autonomic innervation is composed of two neurons that synapse in the peripheral ganglia. The two opposing ANS branches share many other similarities such as myelinated preganglionic and myelinated postganglionic neurons. Preganglionic neurons always release acetylcholin, so they are called cholinergic, and they activate nicotinic receptors at the postganglionic neurons. So these synapses are always excitatory. Here we will go over differences between the two. While sympathetic preganglionic neurons reside in the toracolumbar sections of the spinal cord, parasympathetic preganglionic neurons are found in the cranial sacral regions. Postganglionic neurons are longer in the sympathetic systems and this is because sympathetic ganglia are found near the spinal cord, while parasympathetic ganglia are near or within the target tissues. The exception of this is adrenal medulla, where chromaffin neuroendocrine cells act as postganglionic neurons. Postganglionic parasympathetic neurons are cholinergic, so they release acetylcholine, and sympathetic are adrenergic and they release noradrenaline there are two exceptions so sweat glands and are innervated by isetic choline although they are part of the sympathetic branch and also adrenal medulla releases norepinephrine and epinephrine epinephrine is has an extra metal group which extends its life and this is how the effects of sympathetic system are prolonged. Lastly, the effect of sympathetic and parasympathetic innervation depend on the receptors and can be excitatory and inhibitory and this depends on the receptor expressed in the target tissue. Here is a list of G protein coupled receptors in the ANS target tissues. On the top are muscarinic receptors that mediate mainly parasympathetic effects and on the bottom are adrenergic receptors that mediate sympathetic effects. Depending on the G protein these receptors are coupled with they can be excitatory or inhibitory and once again sweat glands are an exception here and they express muscarinic receptors although they are part of the sympathetic inherited by sympathetic branch of the autonomic nervous system attention was focused on these two neurotransmitters for a long time so on acetylcholine and noradrenaline, primarily because they mediate large and fast post-synaptic responses that can be easily studied. More recently, it has become evident that some neurotransmission in the ANS involves neither adrenergic nor cholinergic pathways, and moreover, many neuronal synapses use more than single neurotransmitter in the ANS. Such code transmission is now known to be common in the ANS. Here is a schematic of sympathetic code transmission. ATP and noradrenaline are released from small granular vesicles and act on P2X and alpha-1 adrenoreceptors, respectively, that are found on the smooth muscle, that lead to an increase in intracerebral calcium concentration and contraction. Neuropeptide Y is stored in large granule vesicles, and it acts as a prejunctional inhibitory modulator of ATP and noradrenaline release, and as a postjunctional modulatory potentiator of ATP and noradrenaline actions. Now, there is another difference between somatic and autonomic nervous systems. Somatic innervation of the skeletal striated muscles happens at the defined neuromuscular junctions, as shown here. In A is a diagram showing a motor axon that branches in to innervate two muscle fibers and their neuromuscular junctions. please notice extensive branching of the motor axon terminal and this region where this arrow shows where the nerve has been removed and it reveals post-synaptic folds in B is a human neuromuscular junction showing the nerve terminal immunolabeled with synaptophysin in green and as post -synaptic acetylcholine receptors in red. Notice the swollen buton of the nerve terminal from which the transmitter is released. C is an electron micrograph of a section through a single buton. Notice the extensive infolding of the postsynaptic muscular muscle fiber membrane. Smooth muscle innervation, on the other hand, does not have such defined neuromuscular injunctions. On the left is a scanning electron micrograph of a single terminal varicose nerve fiber lying over the smooth muscle of the rat's small intestine. Their connections are called synapses in passing. Now if we zoom on one of these varicosities you would see this image on the right and this is an electromycrograph of autonomic varicosity in guinea pig vast efforts and it shows dense prejunction of thickening and bunching of vesicles which probably represent transmitter release sites as pointed by these arrows However, there is no post-junctional specialization. In summary, striated muscles have a motor end plate, a specialized area where somatic neurons synapse and where there is a high density of receptors. Also the striated muscles can only be excited. Smooth muscles, on the other hand, don't have specialized synapses, but rather synapses in passing and can be excited or inhibited depending on the receptors expressed on the muscle fibers summary image once again i will emphasize once more the two oddities of the sympathetic division first while most of the postganglionic neurons are adrenergic sweat glands are innervated by cholinergic postsynaptic neurons that release acetylcholine and act on the muscarinic m3 receptors to stimulate sweating the other one is adrenal medulla where chromaffin cells serve as postganglionic nerves and release adrenaline and noradrenaline into the bloodstream now while parasympathetic neuron synapse in the ganglia close to the target organs sympathetic division has two sets of ganglia, paravertebral and prevertebral. So preganglionic nerves have a few potential pathways. Let's look at this closer and if we zoom on to one of these regions over here, we can see that the cell body of each preganglionic neuron lies in the intromidio lateral cord over here of the spinal cord. Its fiber passes through the ventral horn of the cord into the corresponding spinal nerve and immediately after the spinal nerve leaves the spinal canal the preganglionic sympathetic fibers leave the spinal nerve and pass through the white ramus into one of the ganglia of the sympathetic chain. The fibers then can take one of the following three courses. They can synapse with the post ganglionic neuron in the ganglion that they enter. Number two, they can pass upward or downward of the chain and synapse in one of the other ganglia of the chain. Or three, they can pass for variable of distance through the chain and then through one of the sympathetic nerves radiating outward from the chain finally synapsing in the peripheral sympathetic ganglion. The postganglionic sympathetic neuron therefore originates either in one of the sympathetic chain ganglia or in one of the peripheral sympathetic ganglia. The postganglionic fibers then leave to their destinations in various Now that we are familiar with the general concepts, let's talk about several atomic nervous system reflexes. You saw the simplified schematic on how the baroreceptor reflex keeps the blood pressure within a narrow range. And now let's talk more in detail. So high blood pressure stretches the arterial wall and increases baroreceptor firing rate. This excitatory signal is relayed via cranial nerve 9 and 10 afferents to the nucleus tractus solitarius where they excite the second order neurons that project into nucleus ambiguous and caudal ventral lateral medulla and a over here houses parasympathetic neurons that get excited and reduce the heart rate on the other hand CVLM is the inhibitory center and it activation Inhibition inhibits the neurons in the rostral ventral lateral medulla and in the A1 over here. This decreased activity of the RVLM and A1 centers results in reduced sympathetic activity and reduction of the ADH or vasopressin release from the parvoventricular nucleus or PVN over here and the supraoptic nucleus over here of the hypothalamus. This further reduces the heart rate and causes vasodilatation, which further reduces the blood pressure. On the other hand, low blood pressure decreases the firing rate of the baroreceptors, which reduces the parasympathetic activity via NTS and NA and increases the sympathetic activity through reduced activity of the inhibitory CVLM and therefore increases the activity of the baroreceptors. the RVLM and A1. The latter two cause an increase in the heart rate and vasoconstriction, increasing the blood pressure. To make this schematic more complete, we will briefly mention the role of glial cells in the NTS. This schematic illustrates the proposed mechanisms involved with the modulation of the baroreflex. If we zoom on the vagal afferents ending in the NNN, we can see that vagal afferents terminals release serotonin and glutamate acting on the second-order relayed neurons and astrocytes in the NTS. In response to incoming afferent inflammation, these NTS astrocytes release ATP, which restricts the expression of baroreflex via activation of the P2Y1 receptors on the NTS inhibitory interneurons. And this is how astrocytes modulate the baroreflex sensitivity. Now let's see a nice summary animation that summarizes the baroreceptor reflex. Increased blood pressure stretches the carotid arteries and aorta, causing the baroreceptors to increase their basal rate of action potential generation. Action potentials are conducted by the glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves to the cardioregulatory and vasomotor centers in the medulla oblongata. As a result of increased stimulation from the baroreceptors, the cardioregulatory center increases parasympathetic stimulation to the heart, which decreases the heart rate. Also, as a result of the increased stimulation from the baroreceptors, the cardiovascular center decreases sympathetic stimulation to the heart, which decreases heart rate and ****** volume. The vasomotor center decreases sympathetic stimulation to blood vessels, causing vasodilation. The vasodilation, along with the decreased heart rate and decreased ****** volume bring the elevated blood pressure back toward normal. If the initial problem were a decrease in blood pressure, the activities and effects of the baroreceptors, cardiovascular center, and vasomotor center would be the opposite of what is illustrated. Now let's talk about several phenomena that involve the baroreceptor reflex, and one of them is orthostatic hypertension. The stress of standing up from the supine position results in a shift of blood from the chest to the stretchable venous system of the legs. This venous pooling rapidly reduces central blood volume and this reduction is compounded by increased capillary filtration of plasma through the increased hydrostatic pressure in this venous system. The reduction in the central blood volume decreases cardiac filling and ****** volume or the volume that is pumped by each heartbeat. Now in health individuals heart rate increases on standing but not enough to compensate for the reduction in the ****** volume so cardiac output decreases. The key regulatory adjustment to the upright posture are arterial baroreflex-mediated constriction of arterioles and splenchy venous capacitors vessels, with a subsequent increase in systemic vascular resistance that compensates for the decrease in the cardiac outcome and therefore maintains normal tension. In healthy individuals, mean blood pressure changes a little, as shown in this graph on the right. Systolic blood pressure decreases only slightly, if at all, and diastolic blood pressure increases now if this regulation doesn't happen in some people they have prolonged decrease in the systemic blood pressure as you can see on the graph over here and this we call classic orthostatic hypotension There are several physical counter maneuvers to increase blood pressure in patients with orthostatic hypotension. So you can see over here the red lines show the effect of crossing the legs, placing the foot on a chair, squatting when standing and crossing the legs while seated. The arrows indicate the duration of the maneuvers and notice please the increase in blood pressure and pulse pressure. Another maneuver that relies on the baroreceptor reflex is carotid sinus massage as shown here on this image. Physical pressure of the sinus is perceived as an increase in blood pressure, so it increases firing from the body receptors and outcome is the reduced heart rate. This can serve as an initial treatment of paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia and for the evaluation of syncope in patients older than 40 years of age. However, there are some serious contraindications to using this procedure, such as patients who are at risk or already had transitory ischemic attack or ******. So, while doing this carotid massage, we can affect and reduce the heart rate. Another condition in which baroreceptor reflex actually causing problems is autonomic dysreflexia. This condition typically happens in the spinal cord injury above T6 segment. And it causes hypersensitivity of the autonomic reflexes to sensory stimuli. So in this nice schematic, in this nice diagram, we can see that sensory stimuli such as impacted ****** or distended urinary bladder cause synthetic surge, which in turn causes massive widespread plaza constriction that leads to peripheral arterial hypertension. And this of course is detected by baroreceptors in the neck which lead to parasympathetic slowing of the heart called bradycardia. So this can lead to uncontrolled hypertension in bradycardia and can be life threatening. Now we switch gears and talk about the innervation of the urinary bladder. This schematic shows efferent pathways of the lower urinary tract. Sympathetic fibers, shown here in blue, originate in the T11 to L2 segments of the spinal cord and run through the inferior mesenteric ganglia and hypogastric nerve or through the paralytribal chain to enter the pelvic nerves at the base of the bladder and urethra. Parasympathetic ganglionic fibers, here shown in green, arise from the S2 and to S4 spinal segments and travel in the sacral roots and pelvic nerves to the ganglia and pelvic plexus, and going all the way to the bladder wall. And this is where postganglionic nerves that supply parasympathetic innervation to the bladder arise. Somatic motor nerves, here shown in yellow, supply the striated muscle of the external urethral sphincter and they arise from S2 to S4 motor neuron levels and pass through the pudendal nerves. Here on the right we can see efferent pathways what we just talked about and neurotransmitter mechanisms that regulate the lower urinary tract. Parasympathetic postganglionic fibers, again showing green over here, release acetylcholine, which produces a bladder contraction by stimulating M3 oscarinic receptors in the smooth muscle of the bladder. Sympathetic postganglionic neurons, here in blue, release noradrenaline, which activates beta-3 adrenergic receptors to relax bladder smooth muscle, and also activates alpha -1 adrenergic receptors to contract urethral smooth muscle. Somatic axons here in yellow in the pudendal nerve also release acetylcholine, which produces contraction of the external sphincter striated muscle by activating nicotinic cholinergic receptors. Now, when we learned about neural circuits that control continence and migration, we can start talking about reflexes that control urine storage. During the storage of urine, the extension of the bladder produces low-level visceral afferent firing. and this in turn stimulates sympathetic outflow in the hypogastric nerve to the bladder outlet so that it causes constriction of the urethra and also activates pudendal nerve as an outflow to the external urethral sphincter so this sphincter gets contracted too. These responses occur by spinal reflex pathways and represent guardian reflexes which promote continence. Sympathetic firing also inhibits contraction of the trusor muscle and modulates neuron transmission in bladder ganglia. A region in the rostral pons, the pontine storage center, might increase striated urethral sphincter activity. Now let's talk about voiding reflexes. During the elimination of urine, intense bladder afferent filling in the pelvic nerve activates spinal-bulbospinal reflex pathways, here shown in blue, and they pass through the pontine necturation center. This in turn stimulates the parasympathetic outflow of the bladder and to the urethral smooth muscle here shown in green and also inhibits the sympathetic and pudendal outflow to the urethral outlet here shown in red. A setting afferent input from the spinal cord might pass through relay neurons in the periaqueductal gray before reaching the pontine mixturation center as shown over here. Now let's talk about bladder dysregulation in the spinal cord injury. Injuries between the mid thoracic spinal cord and the pontine mixturation center here shown by these red scissors usually cause ******* bladder or upper motor neuron bladder in which vesicle vesicle reflex re-emerges and becomes hyperactive. External sphincter never gets a signal from the pontine maturation center telling it to relax so all stay contracted. The trusor has to contract really really hard to produce enough pressure to overcome the contracted sphincter so urine can back up into the ureters and to the kidneys. On the other hand, atonic bladder or lower motor neuron bladder happens in lesions of the conus medullaris cauda equina or sacral cord as shown by the red scissors over here again in which the trusor is unable to contract so bladder expands under relatively low pressure. This bladder fills up but never completely empties. So external sphincters are not contracted and small amount of urine may slowly leak out. In the last part of this session we're going to talk about enteric nervous system. So intestines house as many neurons as found in the spinal cord. In this picture is a whole mound of mouse embryonic intestine showing enteric neuronal cell bodies in blue and innervation in red and green. Enteric nervous system is organized into two networks that spread along the whole digestive tract. So in red we have my enteric plexus that is sandwiched between two muscle layers and mostly controls gut motility and submucosal plexus find submucosally or below mucosa which controls the epithelial functions mostly. Enteric neural system contains complete circuits for the reflex control of the digestive tract. Therefore, a segment of intestine can perform basic functions when it is removed from an animal. On the left is a sped up video of the colon motility in the organ bath. So you can see that colonic motility is still happening in the complete absence of the innervation. How does this coordinated movement happen? This reflex is encoded by the enteric nervous system, mostly my enteric plexus that is sandwiched between the two muscle layers. And you can also see that in addition to neurons, we also have glia cells, which are necessary for neuronal survival. Let's first talk about the gut motility reflex. Gut distension or chemical stimuli by the luminal contact excite intrinsic sensory neurons, here shown in yellow. And these sensory neurons activate local excitatory co-energic motor neurons and ascending interneurons, ascending interneuron synapse onto more proximal excitatory motor neurons, but also on the descending interneurons that activate inhibitory nitrologic motor neurons. This synaptic convergence of ascending and descending interneurons means that increased activation of ascending pathways leads to a corresponding increased activation of descending inhibitory pathways and allows coordination of neural activity over large distances. And thus we always see contraction above the stimuli and relaxation below the stimuli. Gut epithelial secretions are controlled by the monosynaptic reflex. In response to chemical stimuli from the lumen, gut epithelial cells activate primary sensory afferents that, in turn, stimulate secretromotor neurons to release vasoactive intestinal peptide and acetylcholine back onto the epithelium. Epithelial cells respond by increase in cyclic AMP and activation of chloride channels. The active release of chloride ions is followed by passive diffusion of sodium and water. So this is how secretaromotor function is controlled by the enteric nervous system. Lastly, we will learn about Hirschbrand's disease. This disease happens because neural crest cells fail to migrate all the way to the ****, and since neural crest cells give rise to the enteric nervous system, these pediatric patients do not have enteric ganglia in a segment of the ****** and distal column, and therefore dead part of the digestive tube cannot generate peristaltic contractions. As a result, these new bones suffer from severe constipation. On the right is radiograph showing aganglionic shrunken part and enlarged column above the aganglionic region. This is why this disorder is also known as congenital aganglionic megacolumn. As a summary slide, I list here items that you should be familiar with. so in this lecture we talked about the anatomic nervous system and how it regulates homeostasis we talked about two of the three branches which are parasympathetic and sympathetic and the main effects of rest and digest versus fight or flight Now, be familiar and understand the connections of the ANS centers in the brainstem and hypothalamus, similarities and differences between the sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions, actions of the mascarinic and adrenergic receptors, then somatic versus autonomic muscle innervation, baroreceptor reflex, orthostatic hypotension, carotid sinus massage, and autonomic dysreflexia, and also innervation and reflexes of the urinary system, as well as disorders such as ******* and atonic bladder. Lastly, be familiar with the enteric nervous system networks such as myenteric or Auerbach's and submucosal or Meissner's networks or plexuses. Know the gut motility and secretomotor reflexes and lastly the Hischsprung's disease. with that I encourage you to use the link here provide feedback this session on the neuroanatomy and physiology of the autonomic nervous system as well as some disorders that happen with the dysfunction of the autonomic innervation I hope you enjoy this lecture and thank you for listening in your attention