Hello, my name is Vladimir Grubišić and I am an assistant professor in the Department of Biomedical Sciences. This lecture is an overview of hypothalamus, an important center for maintaining body homeostasis through neuroendocrine regulation. I will go over gross anatomy, regional structure and functions of the hypothalamus, as well as some conditions that happen from the dysfunction of these regions. The objectives of this session are to learn the neuroanatomy of the hypothalamus, the location in the brain, and structure. Hypothalamus is composed of several clusters of neurons, called nuclei, and these don't have anything to do with cell nuclei, but are rather anatomical nuclei describing groups of neuronal cell bodies clustered together. The objective is to learn the location and principal functions of these nuclei, including the regulation of the pituitary hormone release. Another objective is to connect the location of the hypothalamic nuclei with their dysfunction and to learn about the regulation of feeding behavior and obesity. To show where in the brain the hypothalamus is, let's briefly talk about embryology. this is a schematic of embryonic secondary vesicles the top one is telencephalon in dark blue it develops into the brain hemispheres and the cavities become lateral ventricles below is the encephalon in light blue and the vesicle becomes the third ventricle of the brain while the walls form into thalamus, hypothalamus, epithalamus, or area around pineal gland and retina. The lower three vesicles form brainstem and cerebellum and their respective ventricular systems. The brain hemispheres of the telencephalon grow over the deencephalon, so hypothalamus is hidden below at the ventral side of the brain. Now we have a coronal section of the human brain and below is a schematic to help with the orientation. So we have right and left ears over here. And this section was taken right before the brain stem and that is why that part is missing in this image. so these double arrows point the lateral ventricles and the ones below point at the third ventricle hypothalamus is found ventrally on each side of the third ventricle so this little bump over here is right mammillary body and there is one on the left side as well so So the third ventricle makes the middle border of the hypothalamus on each side and the internal capsule on each side is making the lateral boundary of the hypothalamus. So if we now cut along the mid line over here, we get a mid sagittal section and below again is a schematic for easier orientation so we are now looking at the right side of the brain and this is the interior this is the posterior we have the cerebellum and the brain stain over here is corpus callosum and right below it is the right lateral ventricle and further down is the third ventricle this oval structure over here is thalamus and right below or hypo is hypothalamus over here they are separated by this apparent line called hypothalamic sulcus and this is the top border of the hypothalamus Posterior border of the hypothalamus are mammillary bodies that we already mentioned. They make little bumps on the base of the brain. So they also make a part of the inferior border. Other inferior components of the hypothalamus are tuber sirenum, median eminence, and pituitary stalk, or infidibulum. Rostral borders are made of the optic chiasm, lamina terminalis, and anterior commissure. So, hypothalamus is right within this blue triangle. It is a very small part of the brain, but has many, many important functions, keeping internal states steady and balanced. Neurons in the hypothalamus are clustered into anatomical nuclei. And the nuclei functionally mainly follow this organizational principle. So left and right in this cartoon are anterior and posterior hypothalamus. And pseudocolored azones of the hypothalamus in medial to lateral direction. So blue is the periventricular hypothalamus, the tissue right next to the third ventricle. And going laterally next to the internal capsule is lateral hypothalamus in red. For the most part, neurons in the periventricular zone control neuroendocrine functions, while medial and lateral zones are mostly involved in autonomic regulation of enteric and cardiovascular functions. anterior part is generally driving parasympathetic responses while posterior part is involved in sympathetic responses so for example anterior part will dissipate heat cool the body and slow the heart rate while posterior part will induce heat retention behaviors and increase the heart The hypothalamus, speaking broadly, is a high-level sensory integration and motor output area that maintains homeostasis by controlling endocrine, autonomic and somatic behaviors. Hypothalamus communicates with the neocortex via the limbic system and that is how it affects memory and some complex behaviors. These connections also provide a certain degree of voluntary control over some homeostatic programs. Hypothalamus regulates visceral organs by autonomic innervation and through hormone release from pituitary gland. Hypothalamus receives inputs from many different areas. It is important to mention that organum vascularum and other circumventricular organs is where hypothalamus can taste if you will the blood because blood vessels here do not have the blood brain barrier as we heard in one of the previous sessions for example here is where it senses the blood osmolality and adjusts secretion of the antidiuretic hormone as i will talk a little bit later in this session this is also the place where pyrogens from the blood enter into hypothalamic area for temperature regulation and cause increase in body temperature. A clever mnemonic to remember major hypothalamic functions reads 10 hats. So T is for thirst and water balance. A is for adenohypophysis control, where parts of the hypothalamus control the release of hormones from the anterior pituitary, which is an endocrine gland, and therefore it's called adeno-hypophysis. N is for the neuro-hypophysis, and this is the posterior pituitary composed of neuronal tissue, hence neuro-hypophysis. In this case, neurons within the hypothalamus extend their axons to posterior pituitary, and they release their hormones there. Since blood vessels in the posterior pituitary don't have blood -brain barrier, these neurohormones go right into the bloodstream. The next letter in the mnemonic is H, and it stands for hunger. Several hypothalamic areas control feeding behavior and hunger. A stands for autonomic regulation, including visceral functions and blood pressure. T is for temperature regulation or thermoregulation, and different hypothalamic areas drive opposing behaviors to either retain heat or cool the body. 2S stands for ****** behavior and sleep. We are going to move through these different items to talk about the various functions that hypothalamus undertakes. So now when we know where hypothalamus is in the brain, so this blue triangle over here, we can get into details and talk about the structure. We will zoom in and first orient ourselves. Top border is hypothalamic sulcus. Posterior is mammillary body, making a bump on the ventral side of the brain. Here is tuber serenum, median eminence, and infudibulum, or pituitary stalk. And below are neurohypothesis, or posterior pituitary, and anterior pituitary, or adenohypothesis. Rosterally, from hypothalamus, we have optic chiasm, lamina terminalis, and anterior commissure. Again, this is the mid-sagittal section, so this schematic shows the nuclei from the viewpoint of the third ventricle. There are more nuclei in the hypothalamus, but their view is obstructed, in this particular cartoon, by some other nuclei that are positioned closer to the third ventricle. To find out about the more detailed structure of the hypothalamus, we will look at reclined coronal sections of the hypothalamus in the following slide. Reclined coronal sections are coronal sections at the angle and they are made along these blue lines over here shown on this cartoon. We are starting with temperature regulation and first to orient you we again have the mid sagittal section of hypothalamus right over here where we look from the side and inferior wall of the third ventricle and in blue lines again angled coronal sections starting from the anterior aspect of the hypothalamus and going towards the posterior parts of hypothalamus and two of these sections are shown in the images over here so the third section is sliced through the anterior aspect of the hypothalamus and sixth section is going all way in the back posterior parts of the hypothalamus you can notice on these sections here in the cartoon that they go through several clusters of neurons and over here we're going to focus on two the anterior hypothalamic nuclei and the posterior hypothalamic nuclei The anterior hypothalamic nuclei can be thought as the part of the hypothalamus that drives cooling of the body. So if the body is too hot, neurons in these nuclei become active and they signal to drive cooling reactions such as sweating. posterior hypothalamus on the other hand gets active when the body is too cold and it drives heat retention reactions such as vasoconstriction mnemonic to remember the cooling and heat retention behaviors that the hypothalamus drives is the idea of your air conditioning versus pulling on a winter coat now the anterior hypothalamic nucleus is just like an AC and when it detects that things are too hot in the house it gets activated and it drives cooling so that's exactly what the anterior hypothalamic nucleus does it activates when the body gets hot and drives cooling by the same analogy if the air conditioner breaks meaning if there is any damage to the anterior hypothalamic nucleus either if it degenerates or loses in function due to ****** that affects that part of the brain then the house gets too hot or your body gets too hot which is hyperthermia and opposite of that is driving heat retention behaviors which is driven by the posterior hypothalamic nucleus and the mnemonic for that is when similar to one putting on clothes on or your hood over your head so you can imagine the hood is being put over the part back part or posterior part of your head so when you think of the posterior hypothalamic nuclei you can also think about putting one of those big hoods of code over the back of your head which is also the posterior part of your head the posterior hypothalamic nuclei drive the heat retention behaviors and if you lose activity here due to the damage of the posterior hypothalamic nuclei then you are going to get too cold you will have hypothermia just as if you lose the hood that goes over the posterior part of your head hopefully this helps you remember these two types of hypothalamic nuclei that regulate temperature control in the body now it is obvious that both of these sections have other nuclei and first we will talk more about this section of the tree these are paraventricular nuclei and they are called like that because they are found right next to the wall of the third ventricle so paraventricular the neurons in these areas are functionally the most versatile in the hypothalamus and I will emphasize only the three groups for the purpose of this session First, these neurons project directly to the autonomic nuclei of the brain, brainstem, and spinal cord. So, paraventricular nuclei regulate homeostatic processes through direct innervation. Then, neurons from these nuclei also synthesize several factors that regulate hormone release from anterior pituitary or adeno-hypophysis, such as corticotropin -releasing factor or hormone and thyrotropin -releasing hormone. And lastly, paraventricular neurons also produce antidiuretic hormone, also called arginine vasopressin, or just vasopressin, and oxytocin, and they release them directly into the blood in the posterior pituitary or neural hypothesis. another nuclei in this slice also produce ADH or AVP and oxytocin and these are supra optic nuclei here circled in blue and they are positioned right above the optic chiasm over here and therefore they are called supra optic and you can see in this mid sagittal section of the hypothalamus, that they are also in the posterior aspect of the chiasm over here. Over here, you can see how ADH and oxytocin producing neurons from both of these areas project into the posterior pituitary. So they extend their axons into the posterior pituitary. So we can see that this is actually the neuronal tissue. And that's why this part of the pituitary is called neurohypophysis. These neurohormones are released directly into the bloodstream over here because these small vessels in the posterior pituitary don't have the blood-brain barrier. ADH and oxytocin are important for water balance and lactation. And a small side note here shows the active roles of astrocytes in the superoptic nuclei in release of these neurohormones. So astrocytic processes are physically moving closer and away from the synapse in this nuclei, which in turn modulates the activity of the postsynaptic neurons by increased or decreased amounts of collagens that are released from astrocytes so this is how astrocytes modulate the release of ADH and oxytocin and we will talk a little bit more about the water balance regulation water balance in healthy humans is so carefully regulated the plasma of smallality varies only by one to two percent in physiologic conditions where there is free access to water. Changes in plasma osmolality are detected by specialized osmoreceptor cells in their anterior hypothalamus. Remember fenestrations in the blood-brain barrier over here in these areas that cover the anterior hypothalamus allow the cells in the circumventricular organs such as subvernicular organ and the organ vascularum in the lamina terminalis to be bathed in plasma. So changes in plasma smallality cause these hypothalamic areas to depolarize and send signals to the supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei. Elevation in plasma smolality causes the polarization of these nuclei, leading to increased synthesis of ADH and secretion from the posterior pituitary gland. These ADH-producing areas also receive other inputs from the periphery, such as information of the blood pressure and low blood volume that also stimulate adh release the principal action of adh is in the kidney where it does exactly as it name says it retains water and reduces produce production of urine or reduces diuresis hence anti -diuretic hormone this action is mediated by the v2 receptors At higher concentrations, ADH also potently activates V1A receptors on the blood vasculature, causing vasoconstriction, and due to this effect, this hormone is also called vasopressin. There are two clinical conditions directly related to ADH levels. One is loss or reduced levels of ADH due to injury or ****** of the ADH-producing neurons or neurohypophysis. This is causing inability to retain water in the kidneys, and patients have polyuria and polydipsia, or in other words, they have to pee and drink a lot, just like the patient suffering from diabetes mellitus. This condition is called neurogenic diabetes insipidus because it is caused by the reduced or loss of neuronal ADH production and to differentiate it from the nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, which is caused by the kidney inability to respond to ADH. Another disorder is syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion, and it's again just what it's called. the inability to suppress adh secretion in this case kidneys retain too much water so the main result is hyponatremia which is the main cause of symptoms such as altered mental status confusion and lethargy syndrome of inappropriate adh secretion can be caused by several conditions in the brain, by certain cancers, or pulmonary disorders, such as tuberculosis or pneumonia. It can also result from drugs, such as antidepressant, anticonvulsant, antipsychotics, cytotoxic agents, and pain medications. Now, let's switch gears and talk about the anterior pituitary. Anterior pituitary is a gland, and therefore it's also called adenohypophysis. The few sources of neurons across hypothalamus contribute to regulation of the anterior pituitary, and here we briefly mention just archid nucleus and preoptic area. So, these neurons send their actions via tubero-infudibular tract into median eminence and release their stimulatory or inhibitory factors into vascular plexus. And since these vessels don't have the blood-brain barrier, these factors can freely enter this portal circulation and be delivered to the anterior pituitary. over there they stimulate or inhibit release of anterior pituitary hormones into systemic circulation over here and in turn stimulate other peripheral glands and tissues. Archeate nucleus is one of the few places in the brain where dopamine is produced and here dopamine inhibits release of prolactin from the anterior pituitary. This nucleus also produces growth hormone releasing hormone, which stimulates release of the growth hormone from the adenohypophysis. It also has many other functions, and one of them is regulation of feeding behavior that we will briefly mention a little bit later in this session. Preoptic area is another region that produces gonadotropin releasing factor and we can see it in this section of the hypothalamus. It also regulates ****** behavior and its receptive area for water balance and temperature regulation. So, as we mentioned earlier in the session, blood vessels around this region in the anterior hypothalamus don't have the blood-brain barrier, so neurons can taste the blood osmolality, and also pyrogen from the circulation can enter into the brain tissue and stimulate these neurons, so they can reset internal thermostat and cause the increase in body temperature. Secretions from adenohypophyses control many glands and other peripheral tissues, and they mostly follow similar principle of regulation by several negative feedback loops as shown in this cartoon. So, hypothalamus integrates inputs from periphery and then stimulates or inhibits release of tropic hormones from adenohypophyses. These tropic hormones in turn stimulate secretion of their target glands and inhibit further stimulation from hypothalamus. Target gland hormones inhibit secretions from both adenohypophysis and stimulating factors from hypothalamus. And now you can follow this principle on this cartoon showing hypothalamus pituitary thyroid regulation. this is a summary for relationship between hypothalamus and pituitary again posterior part is neuronal tissue and therefore it's called neural hypothesis where oxytocin and ADH are released directly into the bloodstream from the axons of neurons residing in the hypothalamus. On the other hand, anterior pituitary is gland tissue, hence it also called adenohypophysis. In this case, hormones from the hypothalamus are first released in the portal system at a median eminence and they either stimulate or inhibit release of hormones from the adenohypophysis into blood. This slide is also a nice summary of the glands and other tissues that are controlled downstream from hypothalamic release of neurohormones. Moving on to the section of the posterior hypothalamus. So on the left is section number 5 and encircled here are dorsal medial nuclei. Again, on this inset, we can see that section number 5 is getting this little part of the dorsomedial nucleus, and that is what is outlined over here in this angled coronal section number 5. So neurons in the dorsomidial nuclei regulate behaviors such as aggression and attention and also feeling behavior as well. And this is a nice example how all these behaviors are regulated from the same nucleus. So neurons from this nucleus project to other brain regions to regulate these behaviors. And these are all linked behaviors because, for instance, you cannot feed while sleeping. Therefore, they need to act together, and that is why these neurons work together to regulate all these behaviors. All the way back in the hypothalamus, or posteriorly, are mammillary bodies, these little bumps on the ventral aspect of the brain. So section number six as shown here contains mammillary nuclei and they are involved in learning and memory because they have bi-directional connections to and from hippocampus. These mammillary -hypocampal connections are important for learning and episodic memory so knowing when things happen and remembering past events. Some patients with chronic alcohol ***** develop thiamine or vitamin B deficiency and that results in loss of neurons in the mammillary nuclei which leads to Wernic Korsakoff syndrome. This syndrome is characterized by deficits in episodic memory and general amnesia which is due to loss of these mamilo -hypocampal connections. So, hippocampus is so critical for memory formation that everyone usually remembers that damage to hippocampus causes loss of memory. However, damaged mamillary bodies are one of the other brain regions outside hippocampus that can also lead to memory loss as well. Now let's talk about the suprachiasmatic nucleus or nuclei. These are the small cluster of neurons right above the optic chiasm over here or right over here in this midsagittal section cartoon. Since they are above the optic chiasm they are called suprachiasmatic. They receive inputs directly from the retina, and they regulate sleep-wake circadian rhythms, or in other words, the diurnal cycle of sleeping and waking or ******* state. So light activates the neurons in the suprachiasmatic nuclei and then they stimulate through connections via paraproventricular nuclei and neurons in the intermedial column of the spinal cord, they stimulate superior cervical ganglion cells. and they in turn inhibit melatonin release from pineal gland during the night or during the dark cycle supracasmatic nuclei are not stimulated and the whole circuit shuts down so the pineal gland can start release of melatonin and in turn as melatonin builds up it drives the pressure to sleep and this is why the melatonin is sometimes used to help falling to sleep melatonin also resets the internal clock in the supracasmatic nuclei so the master clock in the body and it's this is regulated by the expression of the clock genes in the neurons in the supracasmatic nuclei Now, jet lag, and I believe we all traveled by playing over a few time zones and know what a jet lag is and how it feels like. So jet lag happens due to this coordination between this internal clock set by the expression of the time genes in the suprachiasmatic nuclei and also in the rest of the body and the current daylight cycles. And therefore, it takes time to reset the gene expression and all the internal clacks. And therefore, the best way to fight jet lag is to be exposed to the available daylight in the time zone we are currently in. We will talk about feeding behavior in the next few slides. Now, let's talk about the suprachiasmatic nucleus, or nuclei. These are the small cluster of neurons right above the optic chiasm, over here, or right over here in this midsagittal section cartoon. Since they are above the optic chiasm, they are called supra -chiasmatic. They receive inputs directly from the retina, and they regulate sleep -wake circadian rhythms, or in other words, the diurnal cycle of sleeping and waking or ******* state. So light activates the neurons in the suprachasmodic nuclei, and then they stimulate through connections via paraventricular nuclei and neurons in the intermedial column of the spinal cord. They stimulate superior cervical ganglion cells and they in turn inhibit melatonin release from pineal gland. During the night or during During the dark cycle, supracasmatic nuclei are not stimulated and the whole circuit shuts down, so the pineal gland can start release of melatonin. And in turn, as melatonin builds up, it drives the pressure to sleep, and this is why melatonin is sometimes used to help falling to sleep. Melatonin also resets the internal clock in the suprachiasmatic nuclei, so the master clock in the body. This is regulated by the expression of the clock genes in the neurons in the suprachiasmatic nuclei. Now, jet lag, and I believe we all traveled by playing over a few time zones and know what a jet lag is and how it feels like. So jet lag happens due to this coordination between this internal clock set by the expression of the time genes in the suprachiasmatic nuclei and also in the rest of the body and the current daylight cycles. And therefore, it takes time to reset the gene expression and all the internal clocks. and therefore the best way to fight jet lag is to be exposed to the available daylight in the time zone we are currently in. We will talk about feeding behavior in the next few slides. The two nuclei that serve almost as an on-off switch for feeding are ventromedial and lateral hypothalamic nuclei. First let's orient ourselves on this particular section so here we are looking on the section number four here on the incept and you can see that it's going through the dorsomedial nucleus as we already talked about ventromedial and arcuate nucleus so lateral hypothalamic nuclei are not seen on this midsection because their view is obstructed by these nuclei that are positioned closer to the third ventricle The neurons in the lateral hypothalamus drive the feeding behavior and if you damage this nuclei, for example by a ****** or other kind of injury, that leads to anorexia. so if you damage the center that drives the feeding you don't have this drive to eat and then you have reduced calorie consumption and resulting weight loss these nuclei are also related to alertness so arousal and this is also expected because you need to be awake and alert in order to look for food again if these if there is a loss of neurons in this area then problems then you have problems with staying awake and situations that resemble narcolepsy ventromedial nuclei on the other hand is our centers where the activity of these neurons drive the satiety so being satiated and not wanting to eat not being hungry is mediated by this ventral medial nuclei if the neurons in this nuclei get damaged by ****** or injury or some autoimmune response to this part of the brain the satiety signals will be lost and one would have to the constant drive to eat which leads to overeating and obesity so these two nuclei have opposing functions and there is a mnemonic to tell them apart an easy way to remember this is to imagine you're sitting in a chair watching TV all of a sudden you get hungry and your lateral hypothalamus activates and you can imagine about your hands reaching out to grab snacks out of the snack bowl or something on each side so when the lateral part of your hypothalamus activates you reach out laterally with your hands to grab something to eat and when you feel you don't want to eat anymore you might imagine that your hands are folded up in your lap so your hands are moving down to the ventral part of your body and while you're resting so your hands are in the middle and low or medially and ventrally so ventral medial nuclei give the signal to stop eating this is one way to try and remember these functions of these two different hypothalamic nuclei and their locations in the hypothalamus. There is one more nucleus or set of nuclei that regulate feeding and this is archaeate nuclei and we already talked about it in this session earlier. They released many factors for regulation of adenohypophysis hormone release so one of the precursor proteins that is produced in the neurons in this area is pro-opio melanocortin and we talked about it in one of the previous sessions on neuropeptides and neurochemistry so this precursor peptide It serves as a precursor for three different groups of neuropeptides. And just as its name says, opioid is for beta-endorphin, a member of an opioid family. Melano is for melanocyte-stimulating hormones, and cortin is for adrenocorticotropic hormone. Now melanocyte stimulating hormones are important for skin pigmentation as they stimulate melanin production but also as it turns out they are important signals for regulation of feeding behaviors. Now let's take a step back and look at a broader more holistic view on this regulation of feeding. feeding behavior and energy balance come together because the same areas in the hypothalamus coordinate the processes that control feeding and the perception of satiety and they also influence the creation of several hormones that are important in regulation of energy balance and metabolism including those from the thyroid and adrenal glands this schematic over here shows how the hypothalamus receives neuronal signals from the gastrointestinal tract that provide sensory information about stomach filling they also receive signal signals from gastrointestinal hormones and signals from hormones released by adipose tissue. The other inputs that hypothalamus receives and are not shown in this cartoon are chemical signals from nutrients in the blood that signal satiety and signals from cerebral cortex such as sight, smell, and taste that influence feeding behavior as well. So feedback mechanisms for control of food intake are the stretch receptors in the stomach that activate sensory afferent path phase in the vagus nerve and they inhibit food intake. Peptide YY, cholestisokinin, and insulin are gastrointestinal hormones that are released by the ingestion of food and they suppress further feeding. Ghrelin is released by stomach especially during fasting and stimulates appetite. And leptin is a hormone produced in increasing amounts of fat cells as they increase in size and they inhibit food intake. The arcuate nuclei in the hypothalamus are areas where multiple hormones released from the gastrointestinal tract and adipose tissue converge to regulate food intake as well as energy expenditure. There are two distinct types of neurons in these areas that control these behaviors so in red over here appropriate melanocortin or POMC neurons that release alpha -melanocyte-simulating hormone which then stimulates melanocortin receptors in the periventricular nuclei and in turn activates neuronal pathways that increase sympathetic activity and energy expenditure the activity of these neurons is decreasing food intake so they are also called anorexogenic the other neurons here in green produce agouti related protein or agrp and neuropeptide y they are also called orexogenic because their activity is increasing food intake so agrp acts as antagonist of mrcr and neuropeptide Y acts on inhibitory Y1 receptor subtypes. So, AGRP blocks the activation signal from POMC neurons and neuropeptide Y causes further inhibition. So, this is causing the neurons in the paraventricular nucleus to signal for food intake and also reduce energy expenditure. Now, hormones from the periphery, insulin, leptin, cholecystokinin, inhibit these AGRP and PY neurons, and they stimulate adjacent POMC neurons, so they reduce the food intake. On the other hand, ghrelin, a hunger hormone secreted from the stomach, activates AGRP and PY neurons and in turn stimulates the food intake. Single gene mutations in these pathways can cause congenital forms of obesity. Mutation in the gene that is producing the hormone leptin is a rare form of congenital obesity. A person with this leptin deficiency will not be able to maintain satiety, and they will have hyperphagia, which is overactive eating that leads to pediatric obesity. Loss of leptin can be substituted by leptin therapy. Another form of pediatric obesity is MCR4 deficiency, and this is the most common monogenetic or single-gene cause of human obesity. Some studies suggest that POMC and MCR4 mutations may account for as much as 5% to 6% of early-onset severe obesity in children. On the other hand, excessive activation of these melanocortin pathways reduces appetite, and some studies suggest that this activation may play a role in causing the loss of appetite for food that is associated with severe infections, cancer tumors, or uremia. Obesity in most of the cases is multifactorial disease caused by interaction between the genetic makeup and environment, and in some cases the only option to reduce the body weight is through surgery. Gastric bypass is a surgical method to exclude the large part of the stomach from the digestive tract and create a small gastric pouch. A smaller pouch obviously feels quicker and it sends distension signals through the vagal nerve to register satiety and in turn suppress the drive for feeding. There is another mechanism by which gastric bypass surgery decreases overall food intake and it is by dampening gastrin signaling as shown on this graph so on the top we have 24 hour gastrin blood levels average levels from normal weight individuals and we can see typical cycling of gastrin release from the cells within the stomach wall gastrin blood levels are increased during fasting and then they drop with each meal. So this is why gastrin is also called a hunger hormone because it drives the feeding behavior and feeding is reducing its levels. We can see that obese individuals without the bypass surgery, so the line with open circles just below, they still have similar cycling of gastrin release but in their case their energy balance is shifted So these hunger signals, in their case, are causing the obesity. At the bottom is a line showing the blood levels of gastrin from patients with bypass gastric surgery. So gastric bypass significantly reduced gastrin secretion, which in turn reduces the drive to eat in these patients and promotes the weight loss. Now let's talk about glucagon-like peptide 1. Here you can see differential post -translational processing of pro-glucagon in the pancreas and in the gut and brain. The numbers indicate amino acid positions in their 160 amino acid pro-glucagon sequence. The vertical lines indicate positions of basic amino acid residues, which are typical cleavage sites. the following schematic shows the endocrine pathway for the actions of GLP 1 GLP 1 secretion is stimulated by nutrients in the gut lumen and you can see here a magnified intestinal villus with the open type L-cell, enteroendocrine cell, shown at the lower left. So GLP-1 diffuses across the basal lamina into the lamina propria and is taken up by a capillary, only to be broken down by dipeptidyl peptidase 4, or DPP-4, located on the luminal surface of the endothelial cells. so that only 25 % of the secreted amount reaches the portal circulation. In the liver, further 40-50% is destroyed so that only 10 -15% enters the systematic circulation and may reach the pancreas and the brain via the endocrine pathway, and probably even less because of the continued proteolytic activity of the soluble DPP -4 present in plasma. Lastly, let's talk about the neural pathway for the actions of GLP-1. GLP-1 secretion is stimulated by nutrients in the gut lumen. Again, a magnified intestinal villus with an open type enterendocrine L cell is right over here. And this newly released GLP-1 diffuses across the basal lamina into the lamina propria. And on its way to the capillary, however, it may bind and activate sensory afferent neurons, here in F, originating in the nodos ganglion, which may in turn activate neurons of the solitary tract nucleus. right over here at the same neuronal pathway the same neuronal pathway may be activated by sensory neurons in the hepatoportal region or in the liver tissue a setting fibers from the solitary tract neurons may generate reflexes in the hypothalamus and descending impulses may activate vagal motor neurons that send stimulatory or inhibitory impulses to the pancreas in the gut's intestinal tract. Interactions between the ascending sensory neurofibers and vagal motor neurons may also take place at the level of the brainstem. This slide shows the effects of GLP-1 receptor agonist on multiple human organ systems. These drugs exert a positive therapeutic effect on human brain, pancreas, heart, gastrointestinal tract and liver. liraglutide a drug approved to treat obesity and type 2 diabetes must enter the brain to exert its effects this study shown in this figure on this slide report that tenocytes which are specialized ependemial glial cells express GLP-1 receptor and transport liraglutide into the medial basal hypothalamus effectively reducing food intake and increasing fatty acid oxidation and inducing weight loss these are common causes of hypothalamic conditions organized by age Now, I don't expect from you to memorize all of this for this particular session, but I would like to turn your attention to two conditions that are related to neuroanatomy of the hypothalamus, which are perhaps not so obvious at a first look. First, hydrocephalus, or *********** of the brain ventricles, as you heard in one of the previous sessions, increases pressure in the ventricles and this increased pressure will push on the brain tissue closest to the ventricles. Since hypothalamus resides right on each side of the third ventricle it will be pressed by the enlarged third ventricle. Now question for you is what hypothalamic functions will be affected first. Now you can pause this video and answer yourself. Would it be easier if I asked what hypothalamic systems are in the periventricular zone? So the general answers to both questions are endocrine functions and endocrine systems. Also keep in mind that paraventricular nucleus is also right next to the third ventricle and as we know this particular nuclei have many many functions as we already mentioned so the goal of this exercise is to help you really integrate the anatomical location with their function another example are aneurysms and you will listen more about this topic in one of the following sessions on the brain blood supply. The most common locations for aneurysms are along the circle of willis and this important vascular structure encircles pituitary and inferior part of the hypothalamus. Therefore large aneurysms may press on the parts of hypothalamus causing functional deficits. With that Here we have a summary table listing hypothalamic nuclei and their main functions. Please memorize this information with the understanding of the nuclei locations in the brain. For the most of them, the names are also telling where these nuclei are within the hypothalamus. I also suggest to learn this table in the opposite direction, So, know the main hypothalamic functions, or the mnemonic 10 hats that we talked about, and connect each of those functions with these nuclei and their anatomical locations. This two-way thinking will allow you to better understand the material and hopefully remember it for much longer. With that, I encourage you to use the link here and provide feedback on this session on the neuroanatomy and functions of the hypothalamus, as well as some disorders that happen with dysfunctions of the hypothalamic nuclei. I hope you enjoyed this lecture and thank you all for listening and your attention.