Welcome and thank you to another lecture on immunology. In this case, we're going to talk about mechanisms of autoimmunity and rheumatological disease. By now, you should know me. My name is Dato Slingman. I'm both Director of Academic Affairs and Associate Professor and also Founding Director of the Master's in Biomedical Sciences. I hope you enjoyed this lecture. These are decision objectives. At the end of this lecture, students or learners should be able to describe the phenomena of tolerance, immunity, and pathological implications, should be able to compare central and peripheral tolerance, should be able to define autoimmunity, describe the three stages of an autoimmune disease, and identify the mechanisms of pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases. So this is where it becomes kind of a difficult task for the immune system. it has to basically fulfill two different requirements and almost opposite one of them you have to have basically a large variety of different receptors and that combined every potential foreign substance that's out there so that means billions and millions of billions of modifications and shapes and so forth so that you don't have a pathogen that we have absolutely no receptor that can fit or basically antibodies that can bind you. At the same time, this repertoire of receptors or antibodies, if you're on a column, have to be in a way that covers all these pathogens but do not attack our immune system. So that could be quite the undertaking to be done by the immune system to be able to have these two different contradictory requirements and maintain both. Now, let's be honest, the immune system has done a fantastic job evolving to actually do both of these tasks very well. One way, and as you can see here in this particular figure right here, is that we have multiple different genes that are actually responsible, for example, to generate the T cell receptor. And these different genes can actually rearrange themselves in different ways to generate, almost theoretically, 10 to the 15 different T cell receptors. So almost, you know, way more than a billion for sure. and so this ability of rearranging genes can provide our body with a significant advantage of generating so many different receptors that combine so many different antigens. The idea of autoimmunity originated quite early with the turn of the 19th century with Paul Ehrlich, the scientist and bacteriologist, who actually coined the term holo-autotoxus and what he was trying to refer to is that the necessity to avoid actual immunological reaction against our own antigens and basically he is one of the first person to recognize the phenomena of autoimmunity as it occurs in a person's body and he these are some of his illustrations on the right side here shown one like receptor binding and of course these are very preliminary and we're talking over 120 years ago but it's interesting that you know he was fathoming what that would look like so let us discuss the phenomena of thalons and thalons is a very important term when it comes to the immune system basically thalons is defined as antigen specific and responsiveness the ability to to see an antigen but choose not to respond to it Obviously, this is a result of a program developmental process. It happens early on in life. We learn how not to respond to certain things while respond to others. Basically, throughout that, our adaptive immune response, both the B cells and T-cellotoxic cells tolerate cell antigens or sometimes called auto antigens. And at the same time, they need to also tolerate foreign substances like dietary proteins that eat and the immune system should not you know basically attack a hamburger or attack anything that it sees and so it has to be able to do that balance and recognize this is self this is just benign this is not something that's my cause of an issue and juggle of that to in the opposite of tolerance so when tolerance is broken we get autoimmunity so our immunity by definition is the breakdown in tolerance and typically that requires that we have self-reactive t-cells so they have to be able to react to our own antigens for that to occur now those exist in every single one of us they are the exception they're not the majority a lot of more eliminated early on in the development but some do linger and have to be maintained or suppressed throughout the life of an individual to ensure that we don't have autoimmunity but as you know sometimes that is not foolproof and autoimmunity does occur in a few thankfully to explore more tolerance tolerance can be divided into two different types central tolerance and peripheral tolerance and the difference is basically in the location of these processes. So central tolerance occurs in what's referred to as the primary lymphoid organs and that is our bone marrow and the thymus. So of course bone marrow is where our B cells mature and the thymus is where our T cells mature. So a lot of times people remember B cells, B for bone marrow, right? B for bone marrow and T for thymus. Although this is not very accurate, although it The bee comes from a chicken organ called Bursa of Fabricus. That's where the bee came from, but it apparently happened to line up with Ben Morris. So it worked. Central thalamus play a very important role, as stated here, but only part of the story. It's one of the first things that happened early in development in life where we pretty much wipe off almost 99% of most of our cells, our T and B cells. then afterwards for the rest of our life we have to maintain tolerance through our peripheral organ to ensure any cells that slip through here and do not die but they can still bind to our antigens are suppressed and that's referred to as peripheral tolerance and that occurs in our secondary point organs you know things like the spleen the tonsils the adenoids the lymph lymph nodes, et cetera. Let's discuss central tolerance more specifically. So, of course, central tolerance predominantly happens in the thymus and with the involvement, of course, of the bone marrow. But cells that are basically V cells and T cells that start out in the bone marrow migrate to the thymus. And in different locations of the thymus, we'll talk about that too. and we discussed this if you remember last semester in the histology of the immune system lecture so I would encourage you to go back and review that in light of understanding this but just a quick recap thymocytes that come from the bone marrow to the thymus undergo both type of processes positive selection and negative selection. Okay, so positive selection is the process of selecting thymocytes with receptors that can both recognize and bind MHC1 receptors. So they have to be able to bind MHC1 receptors to be able to recognize cell antigen from non-cell antigen. And those will end up surviving. Now if they don't, sorry, if they end up binding too strong to MHC receptors or to the cell peptides presented by MHC, then they are killed or deleted and that's called negative selection. So negatively selecting for something is ripening it out while positively selecting something, allowing it to move forward. As we said early on in our foundation scores, less than 5% of all our T cells end up surviving this. So 95 percent of them are wiped out through negative selection and only five percent move forward and those exit as what's called naive mature T cells. They still have to undergo training and recognize and so on and if you recall a lot of this learning happens in the thymus both in the cortex and the medulla. There's different type of cells that help them with that, specifically thymic endothelial cells that help these processes go together. All the efforts made by the thymus and the process of central tolerance, a good number of low-ability self-reactive T cells still escape to the peripheral and end up in our body for the rest of our lives and so that's a significant number nevertheless don't forget that peripheral tolerance plays a very important role here in maintaining suppression of these cells and so you really cannot delete every single cell the other issue is some of these cells may be necessary to defend us from other pathogens so it becomes a balancing act of how many to let go and then how to maintain the suppression over them okay there's also the the variation or the uh concentrations of for example how much of the antigen is there uh versus uh the strength of the tcl receptor and so if there's a lot of antigen sometimes even a lot of the tcl receptor will still find something to bind to but the antigen we don't have as much of it then the likelihood of this receptor binding the engine and binding to it is going to decrease. There's that concentration gradient that plays a role in how many of these cells are going to bind to their antigen. Now the medium or high affinity self-reactive T cells, those end up being T regulatory cells. And T regulatory cells we've mentioned before, there is subset of T helper cells, and we talked about that being very important in regulating immune response and suppressing immune response. And we'll discuss them a lot more here in this particular subject or lecture. As we just talked about, that autoreactive T cells are really a normal part of our cells. There's always ones in every single one of us, like all of us may have T cells that recognize insulin or even myelin, and these cells are isolated from people that have never experienced type 1 diabetes or multiple sclerosis but they still have them. The key thing is whether we have or not is to maintain tolerance, peripheral tolerance, and make sure they don't become active. We also have what's called tolerogenic dendritic cells. These are not the same as the typical dendritic cells that present antigen, which are the immunogenic ones. These are actually designed specifically to induce tolerance in T-cells once presented an antigen. So this is also another way by which we can generate or maintain tolerance. B-cell tolerance is the same concept as T-cell tolerance. The difference is it happens in the monomero. So there's some negative selection of B-cells that react to cell antigens. If they do, they undergo apoptosis in that. But there's also another phenomena called V -cell receptor editing and that is actual modification of the IgD receptor that can happen and make sure it doesn't mine anymore so you can actually edit that and make it not as reactive and it can move forward. As you can see in the slide here, if they're self-reactive, if you do up receptor editing and works to no longer react they can move on survive sometimes even receptor editing they still end up reacting with self and then those end up getting killed by apoptosis so between these two processes you ensure that b cells only b cells that predominantly react to foreign substances but not to self -antigen move on and this is all done with the guidance of t-cells as expected because they control the adaptive immune response. This is a flow chart that outlines basically the process. So we have talons and of course if talons ruptures that's what we define as autoimmunity and again talons is two types central and peripheral. Central because occurs in primary lymphoid organs where peripheral occurs in secondary organs. This also happens early on in life. This occurs in the thymus and mormarum. Thymus is where you get T cell tolerance and in mormar we get B cell tolerance. Again, it can happen through deletion of apoptosis or receptor editing. We haven't, we talked about that last time where there's hyper mutation or further editing of B cell receptors to modify them so they'll no longer bind to the integer and most of the t-cells are killed by a negative selection. When it comes to peripheral tolerance it happens at secondary default organs and then we'll discuss next how that happens. There's multiple mechanisms that explain how peripheral tolerance takes place. There are several mechanisms at least six that we know of by which peripheral tolerance is achieved, and we'll discuss each of them in the next slides, but basically clonal energy, immunologic ignorance, cytokine withdrawal, sequestration, specifically of like T cells, idiotype network theory, and the role of T regulatory cells. So let's discuss clonal energy. Clonal energy, basically, when you have self-reactive T cells that do not receive the necessary co-stimulatory signal, which is your CD28-B7 interaction after the TCR MHC class 2 interaction. In the absence of this, just trying to move along here, in the absence of these stimulation, you will not be able to to achieve activation of the cell, and so what ends up happening is it becomes anergic okay so again typically here if you see like cells make cytokines the dendritic cells present to to the CD4 cell so there's the dendritic cell trying to interact and there's your T cell receptor MHC class 2 and here's the CD2087. So sometimes B7. Without that co -stimitory signal, you won't be able to neither present antigen and the cell becomes energy, which means energy means basically it's just not responsive anymore. So again, if you review what are all the signals required, we have to have that T cell receptor MHC class 2 interaction. We have that co-stimitory signal, which then results in the secretion of cytokines, any disruptions of this process, and you will not have stimulation happening. So, okay. Now, I apologize for these next ones. And there's another phenomenon called immunologic ignorance, and that's basically a different phenomenon where the t-cell really does not recognize the antigen at all has no understanding of it and so it doesn't react to it that's a little bit different from energy because energy is because of the absence of a signal here there's nothing going on it just it's not part of the repertoire and a third and on this slide that we talk about is cytokine withdrawals as we said before if you do have mhc interaction and you get the stimulatory the co-stimulatory signal but if there's no cytokines especially io2 which is the major activator of t-cells or you know for example now enough receptors uh the t-cell will not become active anyway so these mechanisms clonal energy immunologic ignorance and cytokine withdrawal can all explain how we tolerate antigens or how self-reactive t -cells still tolerate antigens in the uh so to speak peripheral system The fourth mechanism we will discuss is sequestration of potentially harm for T cells. So basically what happens by sequestration can be different ways. It can be either physical, such as the presence of like the blood-brain barrier in the brain that prevents actual T cells from, and a lot of immune system cells from actually going into the brain. If you remember from your neural lectures, the blood-brain barrier is basically a system of tight junctions that is imposed on the endothelial cells of the brain typically imposed by estrocytes which are the glial cells one of the most common glial cells in the brain so the blood -brain barrier prevents t -cells from entering the brain and so you you physically prevent these cells from going there another one is chemical how you chemically sequester t-cells basically by controlling chemokines selectins and migration of these t-cells to different tissues. If you don't call on them, so to speak, they won't come. Next is what's referred to as the idiotype network theory. This theory basically suggests that antibodies that we make against self-reactive antibodies ensures that we shut those down. So, if you make an antibody against an antigen in the body, then that antibody now becomes a target for another antibody. That's what idiotype means, one antibody against another antibody. And so that's basically eventually shuts down those antibodies and prevent them from interacting with the self-antigen. Now we're going to talk about our very important cells. We mentioned them several times before, T regulatory cells. If you remember, T regulatory cells are medium to high affinity self-reactive T cells. We talked about those before. They're basically a type of T helper cell, and the only way to really fish them out is their expression of this gene, FOXP3, and that's how you're able to identify them. They made up almost 10% of all CD4 positive T cells, and they also, of course, as all T cells, they express the CD3 receptor. So, that does not make them unique, but the FOXP3 does. Again, what are their functions? Suppressed immune system, they squeeze multiple suppressive cytokines such as tumor growth factor beta, transforming, sorry, growth factor beta, IL-10, and they also cause depletion of IL-2. As we know, IL-2 is the main proliferator of T cells and they can actually kill CD8 cells, T cytotoxic, natural killer, B cells and even dendritic cells. So they are very powerful cells that help us maintain suppression of the immune system. They also control how much immunity we do against like react on infection, allergens, tumors, grafts, etc. So they play a very important role in making sure the immune system doesn't go haywire or continue to, that positive loop of just more cytokines, more inflammation, more cytokines, more inflammation, which results eventually in disaster. So T -Rex always have a place in the immune response. There's a syndrome which is called IPEX syndrome. And again, they typically have questions on this on the boards that relates to T regulatory cells. So again, autoimmunity can result, as we talked about, break intelligence. And this could be, again, loss of function. Could be a few T regulatory cells clones that have died and we lost them so that could happen, you know, and it could result in autoimmunity. Again, this is just exploring the role and showing you a figure of T regulatory cells and how they work, again, so they can come and block and affect your T cell and so results non-immunity we talked a little bit about the apex syndrome that's typically caused by a mutation in the fox p3 gene which then results in absence of t regulatory cells sometimes they lose expression and of course in the absence of that you'll get autoimmune diseases as a result um typically this is how for example if t-cells don't work very well you get a deficiency and that's been identified in some conditions like rheumatoid arthritis so the block that the t-cell regulatory cells usually do on the effector t-cells can be inhibited like here resulting in autoimmunity such as in the case of IPEX syndrome or in the case of rheumatoid arthritis so those both of these syndromes are directly related to the function of T regulatory cells. And sometimes you may have resistance of the effector T cell to T regulatory functions. It could happen. So there again, it's not hundred percent foolproof, but they definitely play a major role in suppressing our immune response. So we just spoke extensively about different mechanisms of how peripheral tolerance is established. Now knowing that information actually has a lot of interesting applications that I'd like to share with you, one of them is maintaining tolerance or even restoring tolerance is a good approach to treating autoimmunity, allergic reactions or type 1 hypersensitivities, transplantation so when you try to transplant let's say or graft something into a host one of the things you want to do is try to make sure that the person is tolerating these tissues so that's so that's one objective of this and the other one is kind of the opposite is you want to for example in treating tumors you want the immune system to not tolerate though that those tumor cells, despite tumor cells, our own body cells. So find a way to awaken or even overcome the tolerance that typically exists or normally exists in order for the immune system to kill that tumor. So two different approaches, completely opposite. One of them is trying to get rid of tolerance in order to kill our own cells versus trying to increase tolerance for maybe outside cells or our own or some allergen that's kind of useless. So, interesting ways of looking at that. These are some review questions for you to practice. You should be able to find the answers for all of those obviously in the material we just talked about. This helps break the lecture a little bit and provide you with some feedback on what you learned. So, so far we've discussed tolerance, central, peripheral and how our immune system handles that. Now we're going to move on to the second part of the lecture and talk about autoimmunity and how autoimmunity happens. So again we've defined this before, autoimmunity is when self-tolerance is broken. Basically it refers to as tolerance rupture and then the individual or patient becomes victim of their own immune system. And so again that results from previously established tolerance. On the slide right here, we already discussed that and talked about how central peripheral is kind of a review of all these mechanisms of again when those but this does not occur we end up with autoimmunity. It's important to note that autoimmunity is not a inflammatory so to speak process inflammation which is usually a normal part of our normal immune response. In this case that's not the case. So this is not an inflammatory disease or an inflammatory process, and it's not a collateral damage as such, which could happen a lot of times with inflammatory diseases, but this is not the case here. Okay, so this is important to note the difference between inflammatory-based diseases or inflammatory damage as a result of overreaction of the immune system, you know, more of a side effect of fighting a pathogen rather than an intentional attack on the tissue itself okay so for example there's there is a like auto-inflammatory diseases like tnf associated periodic syndrome i would also argue crohn's disease all sorts of colitis are all examples of inflammatory disease inflammatory bowel syndrome and they involve the immune system but they're not autoimmune diseases by definition. So that's an important distinction to make. Again, to reiterate, autoimmunity is an antigen-driven process. So it's specific, it's not a spillover or just side collateral damage. It's actually specific to that antigen. There is a high affinity between the immune system and the cells and there's even memory sometimes. The slabs shouldn't keep attacking that. That's in addition to having an autoreactive lymphocytes or which can also produce autoreactive antibodies again and this results in the pathogenesis of disease basically recognizing an antigen a self antigen and destroying it so one of the key ways to distinguish other immune diseases is whether they're not organ specific or systemic. So, organ-specific autoimmune diseases usually react to a single antigen and restricted to that single antigen. Now, that antigen may be distributed throughout the body, okay, but that's still considered organ-specific. So, for example, targeting a specific receptor. Now, that receptor may be widespread, but it does not make it systemic. On the other hand, when the autoimmune disease or the body targets multiple different antigen, let's say double stranded DNA and RNA and nuclear receptors and so on forth and that becomes a systemic disease. So these are examples for example of you know specific organ specific disease like multiple sclerosis. So a target here in this case is myelin sheath only in the central nervous system. Okay, so that makes it, you know, very, very specific. With the case of insulin -dependent diabetes mellitus, the actual target is beta cells, very specific beta cells in the alice of Langerhans. On the other hand, you have diseases like systemic lupus erythromatosis or just simply lupus that targets the kidney, the skin, multiple organs, and multiple receptors throughout the body. So one way to look at this kind of a really neat figure that shows you kind of like how you start out with on the spectrum of very specific organ-specific diseases to very general ones that are more systemic and target multiple. So of course Hashimoto's arthritis, pernicious anemia, Addison disease, insulin -dependent diabetes, myathemia gravis are all considered part of organ-specific autoimmune diseases. On the other hand, you know, mixed connective tissue disease, scleroderma, rheumatoid arthritis, Juergens syndrome are considered and of course lupus are very non -organ specific diseases. So one of the things that's to really pay attention to as a physician is that autoimmune diseases are referred to or they seem to be considered as hunting impacts. The reason that's considered is because they seem, whenever somebody has an autoimmune disease, they seem to have other ones. For example, a lot of data suggests that like 30% with patients, sorry, with lupus also have Jorgen syndrome. And they sometimes even have a second, third, or even fourth autoimmune disease. It just seems like once you have that rupture intolerance, there's a huge spillover into multiple multiple tissues and especially with systemic immune diseases they seem to have a lot of overlap a little bit less with the organ specific so those seem to be more they stay in within that one disease but the systemic ones seem to be problematic and they start encompassing other diseases so something to look out for when you are treating a patient with such a disease There are three stages that are identified for autoimmune diseases. The first one being priming, and that's basically, it could happen from like the environment or genetics. So, for example, if you're exposed to radiation, or if you have a certain gene, like a specific one, actually a specific gene that can predispose you to autoimmune diseases. Now, those will not by themselves trigger an autoimmune disease, but they may end up signaling it, at least starting it. And then what happens is you end up getting another stage, which is called the subclinical. In that stage, stuff is happening in the body at the cellular level and probably at the tissue level. But at this point, there's no symptoms happening and the patient may not recognize what's going on until it hits the clinical phase. and that's when you start seeing actual symptoms of the disease. Exploring this more, again, priming basically talks about, again, a risk factor, like we talked about some of the MHC genes, like HLA-B27, and then you have an environmental exposure, like sometimes it can be an infection, sometimes it can be radiation. So now we've seen a lot of association, for example, between epstein -barr virus infections and multiple sclerosis so somehow the interaction between a pathogen and the susceptibility and genetic risk of a patient may result in triggering autoimmune disease here you can see the different like associations between different autoimmune diseases and different genes and with the stage two we talked about so again there's a subclinical stage, you don't see a lot of symptoms or no symptoms, it's almost asymptomatic, but of course the organs are being targeted, but there's not sufficient damage. This results in what's called epitope spread. As more damage happens, more epitopes become exposed, more damage at a point where it becomes such a way where you start seeing symptomatic disease and then end up in the stage three, which is the clinical. okay and this is here talks about just an example of like how symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis start showing so as you can see here like your stage one nothing's going on and the subclinical stage is really hardly anything and then sometimes diagnosis can come here because you start seeing minimal symptoms showing up and maybe detecting of different antibodies in the body and the key factors and then eventually if disease left unchecked you could end up with chronic destruction. Again this is just a review questions for you, one of them is to fill in the blanks and the other one is a multiple choice for you to practice some of the information we talked about. Again all the answers for those should be in the material that's given to you so try to solve them that way by exploring them. So we just described autoimmunity and typically different stages of autoimmune disease and how does that relate to tolerance. Now we're going to talk about possible mechanisms of how autoimmune diseases arise. What are some of the things that could happen and why do we get them? Why do suddenly we get tolerance rupture? So these are some other examples and we'll discuss. So some of them we use. Sometimes the presence of what's called super antigens may do that, having defective receptors, the phenomena of molecular mimicry, a defective process of apoptosis, epitope spreading, we'll talk about that a little bit, I think we mentioned that prior, we talked about systemic lopus erythematosus, cryptic epitope exposure, the hapten effect, inappropriate MHC expression and upregulation, defective T regulatory response, hormonal imbalances, cytokine dysregulation, and sometimes pre -existing organ defects. And so looking at superantigens, so the thing about superantigens is they're by definition don't bind to where typically the antigen should be. So this is an example of your, let's say, dendritic cell, androgen presenting cell, and here you have your helper cell and here is the MHC class 2 T cell receptor binding and your should be your like the co-receptors which is your costometer signal b7 ct28 but so the antigen usually is in the center between the T cell receptor and the MHC class 2 now what superantigens do is they come and actually bind on the outside of the receptor so they not bind none specifically and trigger a massive action or activation of T helper cells. Some recorded research shows that sometimes this can activate up to 5% of all lymphocytes in the body, which is by the way massive. At any given time, not more than 0.01% of our T cells are activated. So this would result in some serious cytokine release, inflammatory response, and this could also trigger an autoimmune disease. And another example of how good autoimmunity could occur is when you have autoreactive B cells with defective receptors. And so those do not respond to any inhibitory signals and they are unable to maintain self -tolerance, so they go ahead and end up attacking our body. So again, typically they should be going to NRG, as you can see from the slide, or during central tolerance and they're being deleted, but sometimes they undergo neither or they slip through the cracks and end up causing that. Another example is what's called molecular mimicry and this actually happened with several type of pathogens and what it is is the pathogens sometimes that infects our body has antigens that look very similar to our own body antigen and as a result once the antibody response is triggered it cannot differentiate between the foreign substance and the actual self antigen ends up attacking both. A good example of a few of those incidences is streptococcus pyogenes bacteria so which basically when people get strep throat in some instances almost a percentage of patients will get these antibodies cross-reacting with antibodies of the heart valves. This can result in what's called rheumatic fever, which is why treatment of strep throat with antibiotics promptly is important. This also happened with campylovector jejuni. So campylovector jejuni can also trigger through its lipopolysaccharide with LOS, what's called Guillain -Bayer syndrome. And so there's an association between a C-chitin-I infection and Guillain-Bayer, and there's also an association between Yersinia intercolytica and the thyroid stimulating hormone receptor. And so, again, in some individuals, not everyone, infection in these bacteria can result in attack of these particular antigen in the body and triggering an autoimmune disease. They for now not refer to as molecular mimicry because it mimics the molecules. The molecules on the bacteria or pathogen look similar to some of our own receptors. Epoptosis as a receptor, sorry, apoptosis as a process can also be defective. Many different things can happen wrong, unfortunately, with apoptosis. You can have too much apoptosis, so an accelerated apoptosis, and this results in the spillover of cell antigens, which can trigger an immune response. You can have defective presentation of an apoptotic cell to a lymphocyte, which then triggers an autoimmune response, or you can have failure to clear dying cells by macrophages, which then results in a prolonged exposure of the internal, like antigens, like sometimes DNA, RNA, proteins that are found in the nucleus and so on, to the immune system, which then can recognize them and not developing an anatomy response. This is, you know, this is the case of lupus. Another phenomenon is epitope spreading, And this occurs when you basically start attacking the first epitope, whatever the first antigen that comes up, and then start attacking other epitopes after that because they are similar or sometimes the attack of the first epitope results in so much tissue damage that you end up exposing more epitopes, which now become a target of the urine system. Here there's a figure kind of showing how that could happen and potentially, you know, the cytokine response, excess tissue destruction, you may end up with a lot of debris, which then can be presented to the helper cells, resulting in activation of other cells, which then can trigger an immune disease. Cryptic epitope exposure is another mechanism. And again, just don't forget the word epitope. Epitope is that specific part of the antigen that the antibody response so crypto epitope exposure from the word cryptic it's been hidden so basically we've had an androgen somehow in the body that was never been shown to the immune response and then suddenly it becomes so there's a lot of sites that for example the immune response have never seen for example a lot of areas in the cornea the eye has never ever had any exposure to immune system ***** for example in males have never been exposed to the immune system so if you ever expose those, it can happen. You can trigger a lot of your disease. We see those example of type 1 diabetes. There's apparently some particular proteins in the beta cells of the **** of Langerhans that have never been exposed, and they do end up getting exposed, and then when that happens, immune system recognizes them, triggers the fighting. We also see that sometimes with some viral infections like Coxsackie virus that end up after you know like having respiratory disease with Coxsackie end up with post-viral myocarditis and I'm sure you've heard of several cases of myocarditis as a result of COVID and so it's not uncommon for respiratory viruses even influenza and so forth, end up with a myocarditis type of sequelae after exposure to the virus. So this is not an uncommon thing, I guess, among viral diseases. So you can add to this example also SARS-CoV-2. Another mechanism referred to as the hapten effect. A hapten, by definition, is a small molecule that by itself does not trigger an immune response but if it combines with another substance together then they can trigger that and so we see that for example with thrombocytopenia triggered as a result of like heparin so you use heparin heparin binds the platelets and the combination of heparin and the platelets triggers the body to actually attack the platelets and the result of their destruction and hence thrombocytopenia when you stop the aspirin, basically, or sorry, or you stop the heparin, then it reverses and no longer happens. And this has also been documented with, actually, with aspirin and type 1 diabetes, or somehow the aspirin also interacts and acts like a heptin, binds to beta cells, islas of Langerhans, and then triggers the re -response. Here's, again, an explanation of this. And here an example of like thrombocytopenia, how the heparin binding to the platelet triggers an antibody response against them and resulting in destruction of these platelets' heptid effect. Another mechanism is the inappropriate MHC expression, also upright relation. So as you can see here, this is pretty much everything happening incorrectly here. So So this is normal here. MSC class 2, representing foreign antigen, you get a foreign antigen, you express MSC class 2, activate a naïve T cell with the co-stimulatory signal there, get a normal response. Right here is a kind of an abnormal response where instead of presenting a foreign substance, you're actually presenting an endogenous peptide on MSC class 2. now this happens during early on in life when we're looking at central tolerance and t-cell selection but this should not happen later in life so this process should be restricted to early in life when this happens later this could trigger these t-cells to recognize this endogenous self-antigen as a self and then trigger the immune response this is pretty much whether is a defective T-regulatory response. An effective T-regulatory response results in immune suppression and usually preventing of autoimmune disease, but a defective one, as you would conclude, would be the opposite. The T -regulatory cells are not doing their function correctly, then they're not suppressing the immune system as it should. This will result in a immune system that's spilling over, damaging a lot more tissues than it should be. Hormonal imbalances can also cause or trigger autoimmune disease. An example of that is a low level of circulating corticosteroids, mainly cortisol we're talking about here. So, you know, under normal conditions, physical stress, mental stress, oxidative stress, nutrition, all kinds of different stress act on the brain, which then through the hypothalamic pituitary anterior pituitary axis results in the adrenal gland making cortisol which then blocks inflammation, perfect. But chronic, again normal acute versus chronic type of stress where something is continuous all the time and not managed properly etc and ends up in basically too much or just a constant release of cortisol which then results in the receptors becoming more resistant because of negative feedback. This is then prevents or inhibits the typical action of cholesterol which allows it to block inflammation and so it becomes a poor blocker of inflammation and our inflammation just keeps increasing increasing and this could result in damaged tissues, expelling, exposing of epitopes and other mechanisms which can trigger non-immune disease. One clear one is the cytokines do not properly work or cytokine dysregulation. This could result from either too much cytokine being produced or there's a defective cytokine receptor. Again, there's some cytokines that are very important in either activating or in suppressing immune response so if neither of them work very well you can end up with an aberrant immune response or you can end up activating typical self-reactive T cells which are allergic so for example too much IL-2 can cause that while for example a defective transforming growth factor beta receptor would result in less suppression so any again the importance of cytokines in activating the immune response and suppressing the immune response becomes clearly obvious when you have a type of dysregulation. How could that lead to an autoimmune disease? There can also be pre -existing defects in the target organ. For example, in some cases, let's say there's too much uptake of iodine by like the thyroid this could be or this is one example or related to like transcription factor controlling the rate of insulin production in type 1 diabetes and so these type of aberrant conditions by for example these particular organs can result in triggering an autoimmune disease. And again just quick review questions to help you integrate some of that information or check your knowledge so forth about about this lecture. The next few slides are pretty much summary and then which is important here to recap that the tolerance is a very complex immunological process that occurs in both primary and secondary of course central tolerance occurs in primary while peripheral tolerance occurs afterwards and basically mostly in secondary organs when tolerance rupture that's called autoimmunity and autoimmunity involves at least three different stages we talked about priming subclinical and then clinical and there's two different cat two categories of clinical categories of immunity we have the organ specific or the systemic and we talked about different mechanisms by how which other immunity can be triggered such as heptin effect such as defective T regulatory cells and this is obviously an ongoing field that we keep exploring. This is just the references used and as always I appreciate you listening to those lectures and again if you have any feedback about the lecture I also appreciate your comments make sure you go to this link and put those in. Good luck studying!