Hello, everyone. Welcome to my lecture, The Anatomy and Physiology of Thalamus and Internal Capsule. In this hour, we're going to talk about the growth organization and connections of the thalamus, as well as its major nuclei and their functions and their connections with other structures, especially with the internal capsule. Internal capsule is very important with multiple limbs carrying different information uh you know linking the thalamus and other structure other body parts to the brain we're going to then talk about the blood supply of the thalamus and internal capsule please pay close attention this is a very important lecture related to a lot of clinical deficits and presentations read the detailed objectives in the cpg please and also the scholar Rx brick. Looking at the Comlex blueprint, we're going to, you know, see a lot of sensory disturbances and pain that's highly relevant to thalamus. This is true for different types of sensory modalities like tactile stimulations, vibration, temperature, proprioception, and especially pain there are different kinds of pain that's highly relevant to the pain pathway and thalamus is one of the important structure this is true for the general sensory system as well as the internal cathode itself same here for the usmle blueprint you can see it's related to general sensory modalities for normal processes and different types of pain syndromes for abnormal processes very important sensory structure thalamus is one of the major structures of diencephalon you can see here so on the left this is orange and the green you know and the red these structures are just from different angles you can tell thalamus is buried inside the brain pretty deep so thalamus is forming the third ventricle wall you can see here in this 3d model the two large ventricles are the you know in blue color is the lateral ventricle and then you have this middle one in yellow color that's the third ventricle the purple one is the fourth ventricle so thalamus has this interthalamic adhesion that's why it kind of poking through the hole of the third ventricle so the interthalamic adhesion is also called ***** intermedia it connects the two thalami from the two hemispheres together showing here is a slice of the thalamus as you can see here you know the thalamus can be divided by these internal medullary lamina into different segments. You can see here anterior, medial, and lateral part of the thalamus. Each portion has multiple nuclei that's carrying different functions of the thalamus. And then there is also this outside lining of reticular nucleus. You can see a bunch of neurons here. They are carrying the inhibitory neurotransmitters that's regulating the nuclei inside the thalamus we're going to talk very specific relay sensory information as well as the motor information how they are relayed to different regions to the brain to the cortex we're going to also talk about the diffused functions from the thalamus to the association cortices as well as limbic areas. The inputs to the cortex from the thalamus has two different kinds. One kind is a specific information. You can see here if we review the anatomy, this is our central sulcus and this is the postcentral gyrus which is this area and do you remember what is the postcentral gyrus function it's actually somatosensory cortex so the somatosensory sensory cortex receives information from the thalamus specific nuclei so these are specific pathways directly to the somatosensory cortex. And then there are also diffused pathways that send inputs to all over the brain, all the different types of association cortex, including all those lobes, frontal lobe, temporal lobe, parietal lobe, occipital lobe. And so all of those lobes are receiving diffuse input from the thalamus. I'd like to highlight a crucial difference in terms of the ascending pathways and descending pathways. So the major difference is that the ascending pathways all go through thalamus because thalamus is a very important gateway, But the descending pathways like the corticospinal tract, corticobobar tract, corticopontine tract, all those tracts that are trying to reach the body, different destinations of the body, they do not go through thalamus. So this is very important. So it does not mean that none of the motor functions are regulated by the thalamus because thalamus do communicate with the basal ganglion but even that is actually ascending pathway. So the basal ganglion send information to the thalamus and then from thalamus send it to the cortex. So those are still specific pathways at afferent but for the efferent like the corticospinal cortical bulb are different types of motor functions does not pass through thalamus. So if you have any thalamic vision, you can imagine for the most part the movement is intact. This is the horizontal slide of the thalamus. You can see clearly this egg -shaped structure being differentiated into the anterior, medial, and the lateral portion by the internal medullary lamina. And you do need to know the relative position of these nucleus group, but I would not ask you to really pinpoint the different specific nuclei. There are many nuclei in the thalamus, as you can see here, all color-coded from a different region, and there is a long list of the names, right? So it looks scary, but in fact, these names are very helpful because they are really telling or descriptive about where they are. You can see here, you know, for example, CM central median, and, you know, VPL is ventral posterior lateral, and VPM ventral posterior medial right so based on the names and their abbreviation you can already know where these nuclei are so they're not as bad as it looks so we have anterior nuclei and dorsal medial and in the lateral division there are a few very important ones, functionally very important ones, VA and VL, so ventral anterior and ventral lateral, and VP, VP actually being divided into VPL and VPM. So we're going to talk specific functions of all of those, as well as the provenal. So these are all the lateral portions, so VA, VL, VP, and and popular. Again, showing here, you can see VA, VL, and VPL here at the lateral portion of the thalamus. This is the same horizontal slice of the thalamus. There are two major types of nuclei in the thalamus, and one is relay nuclei, the other is association nuclei. So previously, we mentioned about two different kinds of input from thalamus to the cortex, right? So you remember one is specific input, the other is more diffuse and goes to association cortex. And so these two types of nuclei are in charge of those two different types of input. So you can see here with a specific input, you know, from the subcortical size, like a spinal cord can be sent to via specific nuclei. Those radianucleides are very specific for individual functions. And so it goes to here, here, and here, you know, just have three drawn here. Do you remember from the anatomy lab, what are those three areas that are receiving specific input? Do you remember the functions of those? And here too, actually four. So if you remembered, this is our central sulcus, right? So then what's the function of the precentral gyrus, postcentral gyrus, the superior temporal gyrus, and occipital lobe. You should still remember this is for motor function, somatosensory, auditory, and vision. So those are the specific inputs. And then there are also association nuclei. This association nuclei actually has reciprocal connections with the cortex. So basically they send information to the association cortex. They also receive information from association cortex. so that's a two-way traffic. Those are more diffuse and higher-order functions related to the cognition, execution of the behavior, related to learning and memory, and also sleep-wake cycle control. So the association nuclei are working with the large areas of the cortices, including frontal, parietal, occipital, and our tamper lobe. So every lobe is involved with the association cortex, involved with those association nuclei in the thalamus. Okay, let's look at some of these relay nuclei. As we mentioned, the relay nuclei meaning to relay specific sensory information through specific nucleus of the thalamus. So this is the coronal sections, you know, a series of coronal sections of the thalamus. These letters A, VA, VL representing, you know, A is anterior, VA is ventral anterior, VL is ventral lateral. So these letters are fairly straightforward descriptive of what kind of nuclei they represent. Let's start with our a anterior nucleus. So anterior nucleus later on in the limbic structure lecture, limbic system, there are multiple structures that's linked into like linked together. So this anterior nucleus is one of the limbic structures it's actually linking the hippocampus with another important limbic system structure called cingulate gyrus and these hippocampus and mammary body is linked to the anterior nucleus of the thalamus via mammothalamic tract and so these are you know forming that circuit that are important for emotional processing of the information. Now the VA and VL a lot of times are functioning together. They are critical for the motor coordination. So the motor signals from basal ganglia as well as from the cerebellum and travel through the thalamus up to our motor cortex including the primary motor cortex premotor cortex and the supplementary motor cortex so va and vl working together to transmit these modulatory motor signals to the cortex now let's look at look at VPM and the VPL together so VPM is ventral posterior medial nucleus VPL is a ventral posterior lateral nucleus so these two are for the sensations of the body and the face so the VPM you see a star here actually has two functions so it's mediating both the visceral sensation as well as somatic sensation of the face. So the VPM is mediating the three cranial nerves 7, 9, and 10 for their visceral sensation send the information to insula which is a big visceral cortex. And on the other hand, VPM also mediating somatic sensation of the face through the trigeminal nucleus, I mean trigeminal ganglia, trigeminal nerve number five. So trigeminal nerve send information, you know, of the somatic sensation of the face through VPM to somatosensory cortex. so you're going to learn about the homunculus of the sensory function in the general sensor systems and so that's for the face and then for the body the vpl ventral posterior lateral nucleus will mediate this dcml and stt spinal thalamic tract so it's one for touch and proper obsession and then the other is for pain and temperature somatic body sensation also send the information to the somatosensory cortex so there is a mnemonic to help you remember these two so vpm is very pretty makeup so you can imagine makeup is for the face and then vpl would before the body somatosensation. Now another pair, so MG and LG, the medial geniculate and lateral geniculate, those are two relatively small bumps located at the bottom, so at the ventral and lateral aspect of the thalamus. So if you recall in our lab four, medial geniculate actually located very close to inferior colliculi and so that's to mediate the auditory information and send it to the auditory cortex at the superior temporal gyrus. So midbrain located very close to the medial to the to the temporal lobe and so the median geniculate is right next to our midbrain structure, inferior colliculi. And lateral geniculate transmitting the vision information from the optic tract and then send it to the visual cortex located at the occipital lobe. And so these two, how do you remember which one is for what? The mnemonic is about the M is music and the L is light. So medial geniculate for hearing and lateral geniculate is for the vision. So this way you could remember. So A, anterior nucleus, is for our limbic system, emotional responses and then VAVL is for our motor system motor related modulation so it's ascending information for motor functions and then VPM and VPL those are for our sensations you know for face versus body and then mg mediogeniculate and the lateral geniculate those two one for the auditory information m is music and then the other is for visual information l is light and that's all the really information i'm going to mention Here, I hope you noticed that we have not mentioned about DM and pulmonar. So DM is dorsal medial nucleus, and then pulmonar is another big, very big. It's actually the largest nucleus in the thalamus. So what are those two for? I hope you've guessed it that these two nuclei are not for specific relay nuclei, they're actually association nuclei that we're going to cover next. Here is a summary view of all thalamic nuclei connections. Here is a summary of where things uh you know go what is the input from what are the relay nuclei that are in charge of those uh information passing along to whichever uh cortical areas that um you know for the specific relay for the specific information so uh you have to remember all of these and remember them accurately so make sure you go through these in great details and remember all of these relay nuclei what function they are in charge of okay so here you know again I'd like to add some of those mnemonics to help you remember so for example the VPL ventroposterolateral and VPM so those two structures are both related to somatosensory sensation. The difference is that VPM processing the trigeminal components or the cranial component of it. And so you can remember it by thinking about VPM is very pretty makeup. That's for the face. And so you would remember then the other one, you know, the counterpart VPL would be for the body. So those are the two different types of input for somatosensory. And then there's also medial geniculate and lateral geniculate. So those two are also, you know, the little two bumps at the bottom of the thalamus. One is for auditory, the other is for vision and you can remember by m can be equal to music and that's for hearing and then l the lateral geniculate is for light that's for vision so those would really help you differentiate the two very similar nuclei that you know controlling different functions okay i'd like to mention that all of these relay nuclei, you know, all of these are thalamocortical pathways with specific information has similar type of circuits. So you can see here for auditory function, right, you start with auditory receptors in the cochlea, and then it sends information to the brainstem neurons, then to the thalamus, mediogeniculate nucleus, and then up to the auditory cortex, right, going in this direction. And if you look at the vision, you would have the photoreceptors in the eye, goes up to the retinal neurons, and then lateral genucleic nucleus in the thalamus, and then visual cortex. So those are very similar functions that start with the first order neurons or the primary african neurons, and then pass information to the secondary order neurons at the brainstem and then or sometimes in the spinal cord right and then the third order neurons is a thalamus that was a specific nuclei and then goes to specific areas in the neocortex for the conscious perception so this is a general pathway that's a pretty much fit into all kinds of sensory functions Now let's go through those two nuclei that we did not cover previously, the dorsal medial and the pavana, and what exactly they're doing. So those two association nuclei, those are very, those are not very specific in terms of, you know, like what type of information it carries. It's a higher order ceramic nuclei, basically regulating something more related to the higher function, like cognition, like planning, you know, like awake and sleep cycle. so those are higher order functions a lot of times is to synchronize the cortex neurons to functions uh you know like different areas of the cortex function uh so not like synergistically to regulate the function you know to make our brain more efficient as you can see here the dorsal medial nucleus actually related to the prefrontal cortex. So prefrontal cortex. And then the pulmonary, you know, such a big area, it also correlate with a very big association cortices. So the P is parietal, O is occipital, and T is temporal. So all of three of these lobes association cortex are sending the information between POT and Povner. So remember, these information are actually two-way. They are reciprocal. So the dorsal medial nucleus sends the information to the frontal cortex, and the prefrontal cortex also sends information back to the thalamus. So these are reciprocal innovations to help the thalamus regulate to the cortex, and then vice versa. So this is a higher order functions for the association nuclei. The very special nucleus in the thalamus called reticular nucleus. We mentioned previously that those reticular nucleus are located kind of in the lateral aspect of the thalamus, And it's only inhibitory projections. And those projections actually is not going to the cortex, but actually coming back to the adjacent parts of the thalamus. This is very important for directing attention and sleep -wakefulness cycles. We all have the experience that if you're concentrating on something, You know, for example, now I'm concentrating on the lecture, I would not be able to pay attention to the outside. You know, if I have someone knock on my door, I won't be able to hear that. So this type of direct attention requires some inhibitory. Like you have to suppress some information by reaching the cortex and capturing your attention. Right. And then you have to let some other information through. So basically acting like a gate. So selecting specific types of input that being perceived by your brain. So it's a very important nucleus, reticular nucleus in that regard. This one, the diagram just kind of show you how it works. So basically we have those projection neurons from the thalamus to the cortex right so this is a glutamatergic neurons and then you have from the cortex from the cortex all the way down to the thalamus those are also positive you know excitatory and those two types of projection neurons both send the projection you know collateral projections to these reticular nucleus. And these reticular nucleus will send information back to inhibit specific subpopulation of the thalamic neurons. And so this way, the reticular nucleus can regulate what type of thalamic neurons are activated and which type of thalamic neurons are inhibited. So it acts like a very important gateway. Okay, so the thalamic neurons, those projection neurons have two physiological states. One is called tonic mode. The other is called burst mode. So the tonic mode, you can see here, you know, every single spikes you know like one two three four five those five spikes are you know the same exact shape and you know the distance between them are also the same so they're firing very regularly and faithfully so basically you know carrying the information consistent way and on the other hand for the burst mode you can see you have two spikes that's you know connected together and then you just don't have any specs here. Basically, there is a refractory period that there isn't any new firing of the lamp neurons can be detected. So the tonic mode is considered to relate specific inputs, and those are accurate, means transmitting the information faithfully. and the birth mode is unable to transmit the information basically so they're inaccurate what are the physiological meaning or significance of these two different modes turn out the birth mode may be related to the sleep -wake cycle. So it might be when the brain is under the sleeping mode, you have a lot less information being passed on to the brain. And it might also underlie some pathological conditions, such as epsom epilepsy, when the cognition, you know, when the attention is not really paying paid to the to the outside stimuli. So this type of a burst mode is considered to be due to these calcium channels that has a long refractory period. So they have a burst firing. And then after that firing, they have that long refractory period that does not allow any new action potentials to be generated. And so these are still under active research exactly what the significance of those. Some considered, you know, because of the connections with the cortex, you know, very tightly relationship with the cortex with all of these different nuclei, right, including the association nuclei, as well as the specific nuclei that are transforming specific inflammation. So they may relate it to the sleep-wake cycle regulation or something like epilepsy or ADHD. And there are some relatively clear studies showing that in this tonic mode is when people, you know, during a wake stage. So a lot of times when you record from the thalamic neurons, when people are awake, then you will see those tonic mode firing for the most majority of the thalamic neurons. And this is when all of these ascending reticular activating system neurotransmitters are released. And so the brain, you know, the entire cortex is activated. So the ARAS system is activated completely to show, and then when the thalamic neurons are showing most majority tonic mode, this is during the wake state. The sleep, especially the slow-wave sleep, much more majority of the snap neurons are in the burst mode. So this burst mode, as we talked about, those calcium channels are having long refractory period, and then the signal would not be transmitted to the cortex facefully. And then, you know, for the ARAS system, you also have like a largely decreased in all of these neurotransmitters. That's related to awake and arousal. And then during the REM sleep, what would you think? What do you think during the REM sleep, which type of mode the thalamic neurons is mostly recorded at? The answer is tonic mode. So this is, again, remember the EEG that we recorded. The EEG during the REM sleep is most likely just like the awake stage, right? They're also the beta wave. However, the neurotransmitters here only have acetylcholine increase release, but you have complete shutoff of the rest of the neurotransmitters in the ARAS system. So basically, this is a major difference between the REM sleep when you have active dreams and during a complete awake state when you are aware of all the surroundings. So it's quite interesting to see these different patterns of the thalap neuron firing. All right, now let's talk about the blood supply to the thalamus. So there are two arteries I'd like to highlight. The posterior cerebral artery, PCA, supplies the most majority of the thalamus. And then we have anterior choroidal artery that's coming off of either internal carotid or middle cerebral artery. This artery is important for the blood supply of the lateral geniculate body. So make sure you remember those two arteries. that's important for the thalamus. Now let's look at some of the cases clinically. What do you see here in this patient? So my title kind of gave away which thalamic lesions that we can see from these MRI images, right? So here's a lesion, another view, another view. So if you remember our image previously was showing, so this is mostly at a VPL area that there is a lesion to the thalamus. And do you guys remember what VPL is in a responsible form? It's related to the somatic sensation, right, from the body. So this patient actually experienced a parathisia. So the initial parathisia and then followed by alladenia. Alladenia means the normally not painful stimuli. for example, the touch. So when you comb your hair, it does not hurt, right? When you wear a shirt, it does not hurt. But at the pathological condition, those can be hurtful and painful. So for example, a classical example of a sunburn, you would feel the shirt touching your shoulder now hurts. So that's alladenia. Something like alladenia could happen in different types of stimuli. You know, for example, temperature, it can cause alladenia as well. So sometimes, you know, the normal cool temperature can be perceived as painful. So, and mechanical also. So those are the symptoms for this type of ****** patients. Only about 10% of ****** patients develop neuropathic pain so these are because of the central nervous system damage caused pain we call it neuropathic pain very hard to treat these types of pain another case shown here please pause the video and read let's look at the MRI and MRA images as you can tell here there is a lesion you know bilateral lesion of the thalamus right in the middle here in the MRI and then for the MRA you know you can see the arrow is pointing toward this blood vessel do you see anything strange about it As you compare to the normal people, you can see, you know, this is a PCA, right, posterior cerebral artery, that has two branches that's supplying the two thalami. And for this variation of artery of a percheron, you can see, you know, out of the PCA, there's only one branch supplying both sides of the thalami. So here, if this artery has been occluded, then you're going to have a bilateral thalamus damage. So this is one of the important variations that, you know, really produce some more severe consequence when there's embolism. Fortunately, when the embolism is resolved, usually there is a pretty good prognosis. The function can be recovered pretty variably. this is an interesting clinical case you can see here focused ultrasound thalamotomy meaning using the ultrasound to lesion part of the thalamus you can see here this is the lesion area the loci and then you know you can see before the treatment the patients you know, when you ask the patient to draw the spiral lines, they can't really do it smoothly. It's all jagged. And then after the lesion, you can see they're pretty much able to stop that essential tremor and be able to draw these lines somewhat smoothly, right? And of course, you know, the area of this lesion is actually very close to our areas of VAVL. You know, these are the regions that's connecting with our basal ganglia as well as cerebellum so these are the information the sensory information from the basal ganglia cerebellum being sent to the cortex to help coordinating movement so it makes sense that when we have you know special like pathology involved with this nuclei then the essential tremor happens and when that's lesioned it can be treated however the side effect would include you know that sensory and gait disturbances right you know related to the base of ganglion cerebellum here's another interesting case that the simulation of the central thalamus revives the minimally conscious patient showing here with mri you can see where the position of the stimulating electrodes in the thalamus. You can see here, right, the two pretty big electrodes. And, you know, this 30-year-old man was actually comatose. You can see the Glasgow Coma Scale is only three. And so that was like no response to any stimuli whatsoever. So deep coma state. and after this deep brain stimulation to the thalamus almost immediately it changes the arousal so that's the day one you have these uh you know rapid bilateral head turning to voice and then on about day 143 the patient actually can start using objects and then by you know And then 60 days later, the patient can start doing rehab. So this is just like a miracle response from this deep brain stimulation of the thalamus, indicating the importance of the thalamus in terms of the arousal. Okay, so that wrapped up our thalamus section. Now let's go into the internal capsule. So I put the internal capsule in this lecture. is not because internal capsule is part of the thalamus, but it does have a quite important relationship with the thalamus. And also, it sits right next to the thalamus. You can see here, these are our two bilateral thalamine, and internal capsule is living right next to it. So that's why we put it together here to cover both. There are five pathways, very important pathways inside the internal capsule. First, let's orient ourselves. So this is a horizontal slice of the thalamus and the entire brain so this is our anterior posterior and so we're kind of looking down to the brain and this is one part you can see our familiar structure here is our thalamus and so the three different subdivisions anterior subdivision dorsal medial nucleus group, and the lateral. So those are our thalamic nuclei. And then you have the C, which is caudate, so a caudate nucleus, and P is putamen. This is a part of the lenticular nucleus. So all of these are part of, you know, so caudate and putamen are called striatum, and putamen and globus pallidus is part of the forming the lenticular nucleus. You can see the shape looks just like the lens, hence the name coming from. So these are the landmarks that for the internal capsule. And the five pathways are, the first one is anterior limb of the internal capsule, which is here. Internal capsule is a large bundle of fibers. Remember from the last slide, right? So these fibers here, that's in between the caudate and putamen. So kind of forming a bunch of stripes cutting through the caudate putamen. And that's where the striatum coming from. So they're striated by the internal capsule anterior limb. And then we have the second part called genu. So genu is right here, which is like a turning point connecting the anterior limb with the posterior limb. So this is our posterior limb of the internal capsule. And so the genu is like a knee, right? It means knee. So it's like a knee joint in between the two parts, two limbs of the internal capsule. And then we have the sublenticular and ritrolenticular. So basically, those two parts are relative to the lenticular nucleus, right? The sublenticular is underneath, so that's why we don't really see it here because it's buried underneath the lenticular nucleus. And ritrolenticular part means caudal to the lenticular part, So that would be this part of the internal capsule. And so those five different branches have very specific information passing through them. Do you need to remember every single limb? And so make sure you pay close attention to this slide. You need to remember which function is being, you know, mediated and transmitted at a different segment of the internal capsule. So let's go through them one by one. They're all color -coded here, so you can see the orange color here. That's for the anterior nucleus of the thalamus. So right here, remember that anterior nucleus of thalamus that's connecting with the cingulate gyrus through the anterior limb of the internal capsule. And the anterior limb of the internal capsule also carries the information from the dorsal medial nucleus of the thalamus all the way to the association cortex at the prefrontal cortex. So the anterior limb has those two functions. And the posterior limb has a lot more, so you can see all these lines here. so the blue one is for the VAVL that's remember carrying the motor functions from the basal ganglia and cerebellum and then send them to the motor cortices and the other one is you can see here in green those are the VPL and VPM so the VP sections are carrying the sensory information to the somatosensory cortex. So the posterior limb of the internal capsule is super important because it's related to both the descending information from the motor cortex to the body, as well as the ascending from the body to the somatosensory cortex. So this is very commonly tested in any exams. And now the sublenticular and retrolenticular part of the internal capsule. So the both parts are a lot of times correlating with the similar functions together. So the sublenticular can carry the information from the two, like a medial geniculate and lateral geniculate nucleus information related to the auditory and vision. And the Pavanar is another large association nucleus. Pavanar's information is also carried by those two, the retroverticular and sublenticular part of the internal capsule. Last but not least, the genu. So the genu is depicted here in this light blue, it's actually mediating the corticobulbar tracks. So the motor control of the face or the cranial aspect is actually mediated, transmitted with this genu segment of the internal capsule. So again, showing here to the brainstem, that's the corticobulbar tract and to the corticospinal tract is going to the spinal cord and then innervating the entire body. So this is a very important slide. Remember all those information is critical. Showing here again is just a summary of the internal capsule different limbs. uh what are the origin what is the destination and uh you know other names for these uh information like whatever tract that the information is passing through again this is very important for ****** diagnosis or for the presentation of the lesion so whichever way it goes you need to remember where exactly this information Now, for the blood supply of the internal capsule, these two arteries are super important. Lanticulostriate artery, remember we were talking about the anterior limb is in between the two basal ganglion nuclei, the caudate amputament, right? So the lenticulostriate artery, from the name of it, you can imagine this is a major blood supply to the striatum and so the medial cerebral artery is the main middle cerebral artery is the main one that having this lenticulostriate arteries coming off of it and another very important artery is anterior choroidal artery previously we mentioned that this artery is supplying the lateral geniculate nucleus of the thalamus, now it's also important to supply the posterior limb of the internal capsule. So, both of these arteries are very, very important for the internal capsule. So, you need to remember them, especially lenticulostriate artery. It's easy to get the infarct called lacuna infarct. And then when that happens, you have the reduced function of the internal capsule. And then you would have, you know, the patient would experience both the motor and sensory deficit. All right, so now it's really all the summary slides. You can test yourself by filling the blanks for the thalamus here. These are the answers. The last slide showing all these different nuclei together. all right that concluded our lecture thank you for spending another hour with me hopefully that was very clear if you have any questions make sure you email me i will get back to you if you have any comments and suggestions make sure you use this link to send me the feedback Thank you very much.