Hello, this is Dr. Plummer, and we are going to do healing and repair in this session, which kind of comes in sequence with the cell injury and death and inflammation. It's kind of like the next step, but again, this is all a spectrum. These are the session objectives, which should be the same as in your CPG, and this is an overall chart that just shows basically what we're going to talk about. There's an injury, we've discussed that before, and we have a cellular and vessel response. And we can go different pathways. We can remove the stimulus because if it's an acute injury, and we can regenerate the normal structure. Or if it's a deep wound with more tissue damage, you can do healing with scar. Persistent tissue damage would definitely end up in tissue scar, fibrosis like you see in certain diseases like chronic pancreatitis. So we're going to go through injury and see how this all fits in with what we've learned so far. So when we talk about repair of tissue we mean that the tissue architecture has to be restored and its function not just this architecture after some kind of injury and that comes from proliferating proliferation of the remnants of the injured tissue and endothelial cells and fibroblasts these are main tissue but they're not the only main cells when we regenerate we restore normal cells when we lay down scar formation we're talking about more like collagen deposition which we'll get to uh when you have extracellular matrix framework damage, especially extensively, you cannot have regeneration. You must have scar formation because you need that scaffold. Pure repair with scar usually occurs in tissues that do not regenerate and we're going to talk about what that means. Permanent tissue is that type and there's other types of tissue. So regeneration, as I just said, and I do repeat myself for points of emphasis is the replacement of damaged or dead cells and or tissue by cells of the same type and that can happen by proliferation of differentiated cells that to survive the injury and an example that would be in liver and they have the capacity to proliferate. It also can happen when tissue stem cells and their progenitors will contribute to restoring damaged tissue. And regeneration really occurs with tissues which are highly proliferative. And the important point is that the basement membrane must remain intact and the immature cells, the stem cells, must remain intact. And, very importantly, there must be an intact connective tissue scaffold or you cannot regenerate. I've been talking a lot about different cells so let's just define them. The labile cells are those that renew their cellular populations. They continuously divide. Examples include things like skin and lymphoid tissue, the bone marrow, GI mucosa. And think about that when someone unfortunately receives chemotherapy. Those are the ones that are affected. The epithelial cells, the hair, there's hair loss. There's usually a suppression of the bone marrow. There's usually vomiting, diarrhea maybe, and that's because of the GI mucosa. So that makes sense. Then there are stable cells, which really they can proliferate, but they have a very low rate generally of proliferating, or they just don't proliferate. But they can, when stimulated, reenter the cell cycle. So they're considered quiescent. Examples of this are so many different cells. these are just examples like the liver, kidney, smooth muscle, parenchymal cells mean the cells of an organ basically, and all these cells listed here. And permanent cells are terminally differentiated. They're non-dividing. They can no longer regenerate. Now traditionally the examples given are nerve tissue, cardiac muscle, and skeletal muscle. And nowadays they have learned how to regenerate some nerve tissue and skeletal muscle. And there is some regeneration going on. But for our intents and purposes for this particular lecture we're going to say that these three types of cells are basically permanent cells. Now we I think we discussed growth factors but and you've heard it before but these are very important proteins and they regulate a lot of different things. One of the things they regulate is growth and the important source includes macrophages but they can come from other things like epithelial cells or stromal cells they're kind of bought they bind to specific receptors and then they have they signal the target cells and this is all very you know cellular kind of science here medicine the signals will then stimulate gene transcription that in resting cells is silent but then it stimulates it and it includes genes that control the cell cycle so there are a lot of growth factors. And right here, I'm mentioning four of what I think are the most important. There are many more. You'll hear about a lot more, but these four I would like you to kind of know. PDGF is platelet-derived growth factor. And one of the things it does, it does a lot of things, but it causes migration and proliferation of fibroblasts and smooth muscle cells and also monocytes to inflammatory areas. And it helps with healing skin wounds. VEGF, vascular endothelial growth, is extremely important in angiogenesis, which is also called neovascularization, which is new blood vessel formation. And it's what is important in chronic inflammation and healing, which is why we're discussing even in tumors. Tumors can't grow without a blood supply. So they use VEGF to produce more vessels so they can survive. and we do now trying to there are some therapies that are anti-VEGF I don't I I'm not a pharmacologist so I don't know how I don't know how well they work some of them do work some of them don't work but doctors Pino and Goldstein may know more Dr. Dosha Osa now factor growth factor 2 and you don't have to remember that it's two. Somebody may want you to, but I just care that it's FGF. It happens to help re -epithelialization of skin wounds and also helps with new blood formation, etc. is there because it does so many different things. There's really a lot of things it does. Tumor growth, tissue growth factor beta is very important because it's extremely powerful fibrogenic agent. It will stimulate collagen and enhances the production of collagen and it also inhibits that collagen should be degraded and it's anti-inflammatory now these are just a list of some growth factors please do not memorize this one you know someday you'll have to go through these all at some point I don't require you to memorize all this before that I mentioned are in bold for you to look at because those are what I think are the most important but that's from my point of view but all growth factors are important and there are many of them and this is a limited list. So when we want to heal a wound because of injury there are three phases and we already discussed the first one inflammatory phase where you have an injury the coagulation cascade gets instigated there's some platelet aggregation and PDGF gets released and there is the vasodilation and all those things we talked about the migration the rolling all that stuff I'm not saying it in order but that's the acute and chronic inflammatory response so we're not really going to discuss that that was already discussed what we're going to talk about is the proliferation phase and maturation phase and important things include in the proliferation phase something known as granulation tissue and we're going to talk about that it's very important and of course scar tissue which is in the maturation phase. So when we repair things by scar connective tissue because it's basically fibrosis you know we go through inflammation first angiogenesis new blood vessels fibroblasts come in and proliferate and they form a scar and this is very important and the prototype of this a good example is skin and we're going to go through that in a little bit but most healing is not either regeneration or repair but kind of a combination of both and it really depends on the kind of injury the ability of the tissue cells to regenerate or proliferate how the extracellular matrix is damaged the integrity of it if the scaffold is there that's good and any chronic inflammation that's hanging out so let me talk about granulation tissue, which is one of the most important concepts, especially if you're going to go into surgery. This is when you have the migration and proliferation of fibroblasts. And there's deposition of connective tissue, which is kind of loose in the beginning, and new vessels. And those new vessels, that's known as androgenesis. And the white cells in this phase are usually mostly macrophages. When you first start, graduation tissue, the type 3 collagen is what is first synthesized. That's immature. That's non-mature collagen. And of course, all these interactions take place through growth factors. And the extracellular matrix, which I'm going to talk a little bit about, but is more of a cellular pathology thing, but not really a pathology pathology, are things like glycoproteins and proteoglycans. And you need the glycoproteins to cross-link the collagen fibers to make them strong. That's one of the things they do. and you need proteoglycans for hydrating that ECM, that gel formation. So this is a picture of granulation tissue or angiogenesis. The endothelial cells, the lining of the vessels will grow extensions toward the wound site and the extensions are called pseudopodia. The cells will divide and then they create a new lumen and the main control of this is VEGFA. You know, I don't need you to talk, you know, know necessarily that it's A. I mean, that's in the book. But the important thing to remember is vascular endothelial growth factor. Again, I'm going through these four again because I think they're important. The EGF, most important growth factor, especially in wound healing. And it promotes vasodilation, stimulates production of nitric oxide. Remember, that's a vasodilator like histamine. And also vessel permeability increased. And we went through some of this in inflammation and also in cellular injury and death. VEGF-A, which is, I guess, a subtype, is the most important in angiogenesis because of its ability to proliferate and move endothelial cells. And we'll talk a little bit more about that. I would never ask you a question saying, you know, giving you two choices in that, like VEGF and VEGF -A. I won't do that. just so you know the VEGFA is more specific and and it's really very important in angiogenesis and I already talked about FGF promoting migration of macrophages and fibroblasts and remember that newly formed vessels in a wound or anywhere are very fragile and they need to be stabilized and that means they're going to be recruiting what are known as parasites and smooth muscle cells and ECM proteins will be deposited and the kind of things that help regulate that are the ones listed here like angiopoietin 1 and 2 etc PDGF TGF beta and they help stabilize. Okay so this is a picture of some angiogenesis new blood vessel developing from an existing blood vessel and the parasites which are not parasite parasite it's my Jersey accent are on at the edge of the vessel as you can see here in the picture and they're on the abluminal surface which means the opposite of the lumen they break down the basement membrane and they form a little sprout as you see in the picture here and then the endothelial cells will migrate towards the tissue injury by being stimulated and then the endothelial cells proliferate and mature and periendothelial cells, more parasites, more smooth muscle cells are recruited to form mature vessels. And down here is just basically the caption for this picture. You're seeing angiogenesis by the sprouting of a new vessel, formation of new vessel. Okay, so now we need to worry about the connective tissue. and that is going to be mostly collagen although there are things in it and you're going to need fibroblasts to migrate to the area and to proliferate and the fibroblasts don't just secrete collagen or make collagen but they deposit ECM proteins this is all orchestrated by growth factors cytokines like the ones I've already mentioned and the most time the sources of that are macrophages that although they can come from other sources like in the field of epithelial cells, but mostly M2 macrophages. So we already talked about the acute injury and 24 hours and the neutrophils coming, but when you get to the 48-hour mark, the more dominant cell is the macrophage. And again, it doesn't mean that all the neutrophils disappear and macrophages show up. It's a process, and you'll see that in a graph I have later. What's controlling the fibroblasts are mostly macrophages, and the migration is done by different types of chemokines, growth factors, etc. And again, I want to reiterate that TGF-beta is very important in making fibrous tissue, fibrinogenesis. Fibroblasts will create the matrix of type 3 collagen, which is the immature one, and fibronectin. And that at first, like I said, was immature, and it has only about a 10 % tensile strength. When collagen, type 1 collagen, which is mature, replaces everything, when you have full scar tissue, it says here three months. It could be two months, three months. Again, it's not a perfect number. Your tensile strength is about 70% to 80% of what it originally was. It doesn't really return to 100% in scars. The extracellular matrix, which you've heard about, is important because it's what is the mechanical support for cells. and it's important in anchoring the cells and migration. It controls cell growth because it regulates cell proliferation by signaling via receptors, especially the endocrine family. And it is the scaffold, that's important, a scaffold for tissue renewal, okay? If you destroy a lot of it, you're not gonna be able to regenerate. Establishment of a tissue microenvironment is very important, and that's what ECM does. the basement membrane is what's between the epithelium and the underlying connective tissue. So you want to keep that intact if you want to have epithelialization or else you're going to have a really big scar. I'm not going to really go on and on about the ECM. I think you have other recordings and lectures about this. Just realize that there are two forms, interstitial matrix and basement membrane and that this is a picture from Robbins I believe showing you know the basement membrane which contains by the way the laminin or type and type 4 collagen which is kind of important for the basement membrane and it just shows you where everything is and you know it's one big scaffold basically and the epithelium sits on top those cells on blue cells on top okay so there's collagens and elastic fibers in the extracellular matrix which give you that strength. Adhesive glycoproteins I had mentioned earlier and that's important to connect the elements and to each other and proteoglycans which helps with lubrication and resilience. Now please don't memorize the formation of collagen for me. Somebody else may want you but I'm not going to ask you about the formation of collagen but you do need to know that collagen is laid down by fibroblast, and that's in the proliferative phase of repair and modified in the maturation phase. And collagen itself is made up of three alpha chains that form a triple helix. That's kind of important. So when we go from pre-procollagen to pro-collagen to collagen, and again, I'm not going to ask you about that biochemistry, although you may need to know it for somebody else, there's a lot of modification, and you need vitamin C, which kind of explains why scurvy happens. If you don't have enough vitamin C, you will have skin issues because you don't have mature collagen and the collagen is not produced correctly. So there, just so you know, there are many types of collagen. And again, please do not memorize one through whatever this is, 13, 16, whatever. There are a lot. And with each one, there is a disease associated with it. And we're not going to talk about these diseases now, but I just want you to realize how important collagen is and how many diseases it could form. Now, some of these are extremely rare. I've never seen, but we have an Erlos-Danlos clinic here at NYIT -COM. So you see how important that is for in a, for collagen three and five especially. And there are other things that we'll talk about in bone, osteogenic genesis imperfecta, and also Erlos Danlos. There are four, the four bean types that you want to remember are the ones that I've listed, but type one and three are really, really, really important, which is why they're in red. So type one is the mature collagen. It's very high tensile strength. We're talking about tendons, bones, and scars. It's mature. Type three is immature. This is the first collagen that is deposited in wound healing. so it's not as tensile it's not as strong and then two is mostly in cartilage and other things like the vitreous humor and four i mentioned is associated with laminin in the basement membrane again i don't want you to memorize this slide either but these are just some examples of glycoproteins and proteoglycans and what they do this is more biochemistry but i want you to realize if i say the word you know fibronectin that you know i'm talking about something in the extracellular matrix okay and we've talked about integrins as well so just this is more of a slide for supplemental information I don't need it I know you're gonna probably study this in another session so this is a really good explanation of a skin injury a cutaneous injury the three phases you have the inflammation which we have discussed that's phase one then the proliferation and then the maturation and as you can see and what i'm trying to emphasize here are they they're really an artificial construct this is a spectrum it's a dynamic overlapping process it's not like all of a sudden the inflammation disappears and then the next step happens no this is all kind of happening along a spectrum and you can see that in the chart that's attached so these are this is a chart again a little smaller but down on the bottom that's kind of important because if you remember i told you you know the neutrophils come in first and the macrophages come in last I mean, not last, I'm sorry, second, around 48 hours, around two days, but it's not like all the neutrophils disappear. They go down. They're still there at like four days, but it's the macrophages that are predominant. The fibroblasts come in, all these things, again, there's an overlap. So, but if I tell you something is 48 hours, what's the dominant cell? The answer is macrophages. Yeah, neutrophils are there, but they're not the dominant cell at 48 or two days to 96 to three days or four days so the immediate thing that happens is within two to four days you get the formation of clot when you have an injury we talked a little bit about cell damage and bacteria acute inflammation we discussed vasodilation and phagocytosis and the neutrophils that come in within 24 hours and peak about then or a little bit later i mean again it's not a perfect number and it may vary from person to person but then after the neutrophils start falling, you will get the influx of the macrophages. So in phase two, we're talking about two days to three weeks. Again, these are artificial kind of phases. You know, I'm just trying to make it a little simpler. And again, you have a little graph on top. And what you see is the development of granulation tissue, very important, in which fibroblasts come in to lay down collagen and in which angiogenesis occurs, the development of new blood vessels. What you see on the bottom is granulation tissue on the left you see a lot of red and all that red is blood vessels and there's some loose connective tissue in there on the right is a special stain and it's a special stain for collagen or for fibroblast or fibrous tissue and it's blue it because that's what it stains fibrous tissue so the vessels are still there but as you can tell the fibrous tissue is starting to develop here as you go later and later into angiogenesis so phase three is the maturation and that's when type three collagen is replaced by type one so you get your tensile strength about 70 to 80 percent you need to remodel make sure that the scar the scar tissue is not does not have vessels it's avascular and acellular and sometimes if the wound is big enough like in this case unfortunately there's wound contraction the wound edges pull together and they do so to close the defect via myofibroblasts. And these are basically fibroblasts that have muscle filaments. Okay, combination of regeneration repair and the best example of that is a skin wound. That's what's classically taught. There's first intention and second intention. Healing by first intention or primary union is basically the regeneration of the skin, the epithelium. And when the injury only involves the epithelial layer, you get first intention healing. So an example would be a nice clean linear surgical excision because you have really a limited number of skin cells that die and even connective tissue. The second intention healing is when you have a really big area wound a gapping hole basically when you have a lot of tissue loss. They are not easily aligned together the epithelial cells and there's a much more intense inflammatory reaction and a lot of granulation tissue, which I showed you before a picture of. And then you get a lot of collagen. So you're going to get quite a large scar. So here's a beautiful picture of healing by first intention or primary union. This is a surgical incision. You will get some inflammation, but not as bad as when it's secondary healing, a secondary intention and this happens again the wounds are very they have opposed edges they can be easily brought together and it involves only the epithelial layer and so this is an example of that with the surgical sutures. Healing by secondary intention is most other things where you have basically you know a big wound and a lot of extensive cell loss and tissue loss and the edges are not able to come together. They're separated, like in this case. In this case, regeneration of the cells can't completely restore the original architecture. So granulation tissue has to grow from the margin and help complete the repair. So granulation tissue is very, very important. Here's another example side-by-side of first and second intention healing. as you can tell in this cartoon on the left in the first intention healing the wound is minor it's minor and there's a lot less injury there's a lot less destruction of tissue whereas on the right the second intention there's a big wound here and look at all this angiogenesis and over here on the right middle a lot more blood vessels than you see over here in the first intention and that's around again three to seven days is around the time this granulation tissue is coming and weeks later the epithelium and a scar nice nice healing and whereas where you get a really bad scar you need to have wound the contraction of the wound and etc so the wound contraction occurs in really big surface wounds that are going to be healing by secondary intention we're talking about skin wounds here and what it does is helps close the gap between the edges of the skin and the dermis and reduces the surface area of the wound and I mentioned the myofibroblast before so I'm repeating myself like I often do and again remember that myofibroblasts contain characteristics of both muscle cells and fibrous tissue and they help contract the wound again via growth factors like listed here that are usually released mostly by macrophages only by macrophages no but mostly by macrophages okay so now when you have a big wound and you have to remodel it uh the granulation tissue is replaced by scar and this is going to involve changes in the extracellular matrix and there's going to you're going to have to rely on a sin the body's going to have to rely on between the synthesis and degradation of extracellular proteins. And that's where matrix metalloproteinases come in. There are enzymes which degrade and they're very important in this balance. These matrix metalloproteinases are here about again. They're produced by a lot of different cells as listed and they are made and secreted and regulated by growth factors and cytokines, etc. So here's some examples that are listed underneath. Again, I don't need you to memorize that interstitial collagenases, cleave, fibrillary collagen. I just want you to understand there's many different ones. And what stops this from happening? What's the balance between degradation and synthesis? Well, there's something called tissue inhibitors of metalloprotonases, and they're what shut down the metalloprotonases so that they don't continue to degrade again we discussed this the tensile strength of the wound depends on the amount of collagen and also you want the the degradation to decrease right so by the again i'm repeating myself end of first week wound strength is about 10 percent in the unwounded skin and after a few months two to three it plateaus at about 70 to 80 percent so this is another overview picture where you have a persistent stimulus like chronic inflammation that is activating things like macrophages which act you know goes ahead and produces growth factors cytokines and decreases metallic proteinase activity and that all leads basically to increase collagen synthesis from the fibroblast etc and decrease collagen degradation and you get fibrosis and fibrosis is just basically scar scarring now i'm going to talk about this one slide talks about regeneration of the liver i'm not i'm i just feel you don't you can't graduate from medical school without knowing a little bit about the liver is a little bit different than a lot of organs because it can regenerate it's really kind of strange but you can do 60 percent hepectomy hepatectomy i'm sorry the liver um and you will get liver back and the tissue back and mechanism is the proliferation of what remains behind the remaining liver cells and also repopulation from progenitor cells. So this is means that the hepatocytes you know they they divide and they have a proliferative capacity but sometimes they're impaired this capacity especially in like alcoholic liver disease and things like that. I want just to emphasize the regeneration of liver is not just regrowth of the lobes you know but it does occur in phases listed here primary where the liver cells are again primed by cytokines which are made by macrophages and in the liver when we talk about the liver the macrophages are called cuffer cells again they like to call macrophages different things in different tissue and there's a growth factor phase and a termination phase i'm just mentioning this i want you to put this in the back of your head but this is the liver is a little bit different than what we've been talking about wounds of the skin. Now what is going to get in the way of healing okay of a wound and again this is very important in surgery. An infection okay a local infection that's why sterile technique is so important. If you get pro-inflammatory cytokines and tissue proteases they will degrade that granulation tissue and you cannot have a good uh repair or or scar uh hypoxia if you have a loss of if the blood vessels and the blood rbcs don't bring enough oxygen then you're going to have a problem with wound healing and that happens with inadequate circulation arteriosclerosis things like that uh diabetes for example trauma uh if you have a trauma to i mean if you're all you know have a nice wound there that somebody stitched and then you go and rip it open for some you know because you you stood the wrong way that's not good foreign bodies that's why we debride wounds the foreign bodies are things like rocks and glass and things from motorcycle accidents um you know bullets things like that they have to be debrided they have to be taken out or else you're going to have a problem with wound healing and I mentioned diabetes because you got glycosylation that will impair neutrophil and macrophagocytosis and you'll learn more about that in diabetes malnutrition like I mentioned scurvy will decrease the proliferation phase immunodeficiency some medications like steroids will blunt the inflammatory process etc hormones and the mechanics of the like if you have a wound right over the elbow joint that's gonna be a little harder you have to keep it in a certain state so again everything depends on the size the location the type of wound remember the face is very very vascular and it heals faster than something like the foot which is not so vascular complications well there are a lot of complications but the big ones i want you to know about are wound dehiscence and ulceration uh keloid and contractures and in wound dehiscence basically you don't have enough scar formation and the wound just comes apart in excessive scar formation we have the formation of what is known as keloids which is basically scar tissue that extends beyond the boundaries of the original wound which is more common in darker skinned people but can happen in anyone. I want to make the distinction between keloid and hypertrophic scar. A hypertrophic scar means you have a lot an excessive amount of collagen and get a raised scar but it does not extend beyond the boundary of the original wound and then contractures that happen in palms and soles especially in burn victims where you get lot of contracture so this is a person who had a dehiscence of their wound very commonly this happens um i should say most commonly in abdominal surgery and obesity can contribute to it vomiting coughing can you burst the wound open so there's some increased abdominal pressure and that can happen and of course that's not good ulceration especially in poor circulation like in diabetes and peripheral vascular disease. And this is a very good example, a bad example, if you will, of a keloid from an ear piercing. And again, I want you to know that keloid and hypertrophic scars are two different things. In keloid, you have a lot of collagen forming. It's very disorganized. It extends beyond the borders of the bone. And the problem with keloids, and this is really upsetting because I once saw this in a plastic surgery clinic, they frequently recur after you so you take out the scar the high keloid and you get more keloid it's extremely difficult to treat extremely difficult um hypertrophic is parallel collagen it's confined to the borders of the original wound and it doesn't really recur if you remove it okay so this is something um that's important in wound healing uh and you want to it is treated different ways and I don't deal with treatment, but I want you to know the difference. So now we're going to just review and then do some questions and be done with this. This is basically, I don't have to read it all to you, but this is a review of what I just said about VEGF being important with vessel permeability, the neutrophils in 24 hours to clean out everything, and macrophages by about 48 to 96 again not an exact number and angiogenesis extracellular matrix deposition the fibroblasts migrate to the injury site and that's all orchestrated by things like cytokines and these growth factors and they proliferate the fibroblasts mostly coming by growth factors that come from the macrophages so at 24 to 48 hours the epithelial cells move from the wound edge along the margins of the dermis and they put down basement membrane components and you get a nice thin epithelial layer. When you have a bigger wound, you need an increase in collagen fibers to bridge that. Again, I want to mention granulation tissue five to seven days is about four to seven days, five to seven days. That is really the presence of angiogenesis or vascular endothelial cells proliferating and fibroblasts and also macrophages are there. So it's like three really big elements that are there. Neovascularization is the same thing as angiogenesis. By the second week, if everything goes well, your white cells should be gone. Your inflammation should be gone if you want to heal. So should the edema and the increase in vascularity. And I'm going to repeat myself from something in the beginning. TGF beta is one of the most important fibrogenic agent, and it causes the fibroblasts to migrate and proliferate and, of course, increased synthesis of collagen. Okay, so again, this is just a more continuation of what I've just said, and a lot of this is repetition. Scar is a cellular connective tissue. There's no inflammation in it, and it's usually covered by intact epithelium, not always. Okay, so let's do a few questions. Okay, this first question you can read. You can stop the video, whatever you want to do, and it's about an experiment that's being conducted on the effects of certain drugs on wound healing and the uh they give them a drug a and they make a cut in the thigh of a lab rat and one week later a biopsy is taken from that area and when you look under the microscope you see capillaries fibroblasts and some inflammatory cells mostly macrophages with some occasional neutrophils so what are we talking about are we talking about scar tissue granulan granulation tissue purulent tissue or permanent tissue and hopefully after this you understand that this answer is B as in boy granulation tissue okay this is not scar tissue scar tissue does not have vessels or inflammation purulent tissue means pus also known as super super super super and permanent tissue of things like nerves and and and skeletal muscle and cardiac muscle next question is a 70 year old woman who comes in with shortness of breath and chest pain obviously we're going here along with a myocardial infarction she undergoes cardiac catheterization which shows that the left anterior descending coronary artery is occluded and all the lab studies that occur in the EKG show that indeed she has an acute MI so which of the following is the most likely pathological finding in that affected heart muscle six weeks later again we're talking about cardiac muscle which does not regenerate by six weeks you should not have vessels or inflammation what you should have is is a good start if not you know almost ending of this of the scar tissue so the answer here is d as in david collagen rich scar tissue the other answers are incorrect third question is a 10 year old boy who gets a deep laceration over his right eyebrow when he plays ice hockey they clean the wound they suture it which of the following describes the principal function of macrophages that are present in that wound about 48 hours after injury again it's approximate and hopefully your eyes would go straight to d as in david phagocytosis and that at that moment 48 hours that's what's most important that the macrophages are doing are phagocytosis in the previous question which of the following college and there's a positive first during wound healing so this is a type you know a first order question just whether you know it or not and just remember that the first one or the immature one is type three so the answer is c as in charlie and type one is the mature here's a summary slide and the lecture feedback form thank you very much for your attention please feel free to email me come by my office anything you need to reach me and i'll be happy to answer any questions thanks a lot again