Hello, everyone. My name is Dr. Patel. I'm one of the pediatricians at Old Westbury. I will be talking about pediatric rheumatology today, which I know you guys get a lecture on rheumatology in general and a lot of adult rheumatology, but this will be a little bit of a pediatric aspect of it. So let's get started. Okay, so here are the objectives. We're going to talk about just some basic concepts, which I'm sure you guys already know, but it might be a good refresher. And then common pediatric pathologies that we're going to talk about are all these that are listed here. The one I want you guys to really focus on that's different than some of the other ones are really your juvenile idiopathic arthritis or GIA. And we'll go into that pretty in depth. Everything else is sort of relatable to the adult side with just a couple of nuances and differences, which we can talk about as we go through them. But GIA is what I want you guys to focus on. So I'm going to start with a question because I think it helps us to relate it to something to make it a little bit more concrete, all this information that I'm about to give you. So we'll start with a question. A three-year-old male brought to the clinic by his mother for about two months of swelling in his knees. He went to the urgent care three months ago for upper respiratory infection. It stops him from running around as much, and he also felt warm the past two weeks, especially in the evenings. He's also had some red and pink circles on his skin during that time, which then go away on his own. On exam, his conjunctiva are pale bilaterally. There's papable cervical, inguinal, and popatial lymph nodes and lymphadenopathy. His liver is three centimeters below the costal margin, and his vitals include a heart rate of 130 while it's calm. So the question is, if you get blood work on this patient, what do you think it would show? OK, so multi-part question, which is how you should get used to thinking about questions, because when you are taking your board exams, this is how they're going to ask you that they're going to ask you in a higher order question or second order, third, third order question. So, for example, you have to know in this scenario, in this little question stem that you get what the diagnosis is. And then once you figure out the diagnosis, now it's asking you if you got blood work, what do you think it would show? Right. So enforces two different ideas. So you should kind of get in the mindset of thinking like that. All right. So every anytime I approach a problem, like a question, I tend to in my head just sort of highlight the most important things. And on your exams, you can use the highlight button to also help you. And that for me kind of narrows it down from all the other details that are in the question. So, for example, for this for this question, the age is important. So he's three years old. He's had two months of this swelling in his knees on both sides. He had a recent URI. He isn't able to run as much. There's some activity limitation. And he's he has also felt warm for the past two weeks, especially the evenings. And then these red and pink circles that he's had, which then go away on exam. He's had some conjunctival pallor, which we've seen, and the cervical lymphadenopathy and the kind of systemic lymphadenopathy. He also has some hepatomegaly and then a tachycardia as well. So and again, what they're asking is the blood work. OK, so we're going to keep that in our in the back of our minds as we go through this lecture. OK, let's start with some just basic concepts. So the truth is that rheumatological conditions can mimic a lot of different other conditions. So it's really important to do a good history and physical to kind of piece out those components. And then you will get some autoimmune markers, some serological testing. You can get some path testing and then some imaging. So all that put together is when you would kind of diagnose someone with a rheumatological disease. And then there's some clues that might help you determine whether this is rheumatologic in nature or something else. So some fevers that kind of come and go, arthritis. So that means arthra, which means joint, and algaes, which means pain. So they come with joint pain, but also with arthritis. So inflammation. So itis is the inflammation, right, of the joint. So you not only get joint pain, but you also get inflammation of the joint. Timing. So usually rheumatological conditions present with morning stiffness and then it gets better as you use it more. Also, a lot of them are accompanied by rash and then weakness and fatigue, sort of systemic other signs of inflammation. Remember, it's usually the duration that will likely clue you in that this is something that's been going on for a longer period of time than something that might be acute that you might want to look at in one kind of instance. Going along with the joint stiffness, you can also have limited range of motion, pain with joint motion. You can have gait disturbances. Like I said, the fevers and the fatigue and weakness kind of go together. So that's all things you want to think about. Okay, what you don't want to miss in someone you suspect might have a rheumatological condition, but you don't want to miss this because that can be very detrimental to the patient because the treatments are very different, right? Right. So the things you don't want to miss is cancer, of course. So ALL, neuroblastoma, those can all mimic some of these signs, especially like fever, joint like joint pain, overall weakness. Some of the inflammatory markers that we'll see rashes. Those are all things that can also present with cancer, bone pain. Right. Then you have things like infections. So viral diseases, you don't want to miss a septic arthritis, Lyme disease, which can cause arthralgias in the later manifestations of Lyme. Osteomyelitis, again, bone pain, but now with infection and pus in the bone, which can also present with fever, rash, bone pain, fatigue, things like that, limitation of range of motion. and then some other systemic kind of things like metabolics or thyroid disorders can also cause weakness fatigue chronic pain disorders like fibromyalgia depression can also cause overall kind of pain and arthralgias without arthritis's you can have vasculitides that also mimic it and we'll talk about one of the vasculitides that's kind of characterized in rheumatologic as well in that bucket. Orthopedic concerns, so patellofemoral syndrome, growing pains, that can also present with similar symptoms. And then autoimmune disorders such as IBD can also present with fever, rash, some joint pain, weakness, fatigue, also accompanied by some the GI symptoms, of course. Okay. So next, I have this, sorry. Okay. Next, I have this table that I really liked that I got from Nelson's Pediatrics. It has all sort of some basic characteristics and then the different pathologies that are most common that you'll probably see. So lupus is this one, um, JIA, which is the one I told you guys that is really important is here. Um, then things that kind of mimic these symptoms like leukemia, lymph, um, sorry, Lyme disease, rheumatoid, uh, rheumatic fever, um, got a, got a coxie me. Uh, I can't talk today. Um, got a coxie me a Kawasaki disease. Those are all, um, things that could present with fever, a rash, uh, joint pain, things like that. So this is a good kind of summary of some of them and then kind of comparing them side by side. So please go through this if you have some time, because it just helps me and my brain to kind of organize these things. Because in the question stems, when they're going to ask you, they're going to ask you some things that will help you say, okay, it's this versus this other thing that has similar kind of findings, okay? Okay, so still going along with the basic concepts. For diagnosis, you want to do a complete physical exam. So remember that these rheumatological conditions are multi-system, which means they involve more than just one body part, right? So you want to do a very thorough skin exam. Oh, there we go. There I am. You want to do a very thorough skin exam, scalp exam, which could include any like, you know, alopecia or generalized skin rashes. You can find rashes that spare nasolabial folds, which mean one thing versus if they don't could mean another thing. Sometimes the rashes around the ears, the eyes, lower extremities. Remember we talked about hair patterns. You also want to look at the nail beds. Those are super important. And the way we do that is we do nail fold capillaryoscopy. That's not easy to say. And that usually shows abnormalities in the small capillaries in the nail bed. So that's what this picture on the bottom left is showing you, is that this patient, the images in A, B, and C show abnormal vessel growth. And what it should look like is in panel D. That's normal nail bed capillaries, whereas you see they're more torturous, you're more dilated, they're more abnormal in their shape in both B and C. And you can see them, if it's really severe, you can see them grossly, but the little visualization tool, the capillarioscopy, really helps you look at it even closer. You'll see they'll be branched or bushy, and that's from neovascularization of those capillaries. Okay. And this whole panel, this four panel is from a 19-year-old with juvenile dermatomyositis. So that's good. All right. You want to look at the oropharynx because a lot of these patients will have ulcers. So specifically, the hard palate, which is at the top of your mouth, that can have ulcers, which can be associated with lupus. And this is a picture of that above the capillary oscopy. You can also get a lot of mucositis in the mouth. So mucositis just means inflammation of the mucosa. So lips will be cracked. they'll be um they'll be bleeding inside is very friable of the the mouth it's painful um you can also get tmg tmj so um joint instability and inflammation which is specifically associated with one of the rheumatological conditions but that's also something that you can check in your physical exam you want to check for lymph nodes of force lymphadenopathy um you want to check the eyes. So uveitis is very commonly seen in a lot of different rheumatological conditions. So for example, if you refer to the chart beforehand, you will see that a lot of them were accompanied with uveitis or conjunctivitis, which this picture at the top shows you anterior uveitis on gross examination. You can see that there's injection of the sclera, you can see little keratotic precipitates and then um I don't know how to say this but the um uh the pus buildup in the eye the ophthalmology the ophthalmology um residents would be so disappointed in me because I worked with them for a month um okay then uh for the heart you want to listen for any pericardial rubs or um pericardial fusions uh for the lungs you want to listen for any pleural fusions and also So some rheumatological conditions can also be associated with interstitial lung disease or scarring or honeycombing of the lungs. And then you want to look at all of the joints very thoroughly. So that's looking at all of the joints that you can see, the small joints, the large joints. And remember, arthritis is defined as intra -articular swelling of two or more of the following findings. So it should be pain on motion. Range of motion is limited. There's warmth to the area. And those would be all signs that there's arthritis or inflammation going on. At times, it presents with limb length discrepancy. And this can be because there's initial acceleration and then there's destruction of the joint, which will then prevent it from getting to the full length. Okay. All right. So basic labs. So remember that lymphopenia is more specific to lupus than leukopenia. In systemic GIA, which we'll talk about GIA, the white blood cell count is actually elevated, again, due to the inflammation. Platelets will be elevated, again, acute phase reactant due to inflammation. Hemoglobin is usually low, which is nonspecific, but usually due to anemia of chronic disease. Inflammatory markers, including ESR and CRP, will be elevated. Remember, they're nonspecific, so it doesn't tell you much about where this inflammation may be going on, it just tells you that there is systemic inflammation. CRP is more of your acute phase reactant, so that'll go up faster, but it comes down faster. ESR, it takes a longer period of time to kind of build and then can stay elevated for a longer period of time. Then rheumatoid factor, which I know you guys learned about, sometimes it's present in children with JIA and that is actually a poor indicator as well as a poor sensitivity for correlating with having arthritis, but it can be present in less than 10% of children. And there is a specific subset of JIA that is rheumatoid factor positive. If you correlate the rheumatoid factor with the symptoms, that is a much stronger prognostic indicator. Like I told you, if they have rheumatoid factors positive, they have bad symptoms of arthritis, and you diagnose them with JIA, they're very likely that their prognosis for developing rheumatoid arthritis in the future or prolonged arthritis for the rest of their lives is very positive. Okay, you could also do the anti-CCP, which is more specific than the RF. And so you'll get positivity in the rheumatoid factor positive JIA subset as well. You get the anti-CCP will also be positive. Remember that the anti-nuclear antibody, the ANA, has low specificity. So what that means is that in 30% of the general population of normal children, you'll actually get a titer that is 1 to 60 for the ANA. So and then once it's positive, it will reflect to all of the other kind of specific autoantibodies, which are listed in that little area there. But remember, it's not recommended for screening purposes, but more so for correlating it with symptoms that the patient may be having. Remember, your double -stranded DNA, your anti-Smith, those can be associated with lupus diagnosis. Your anti-Roe, anti -La, that's usually Sjogren's or lupus. Anti-histone gives you the drug-induced lupus suspicion. And then the ANCAs, the ANCAs are usually for vasculitides, anti-topoisomerase, or SCL70, as usually for systemic sclerosis, which is really rare in childhood. And then also if they're having muscle weakness, you want to check for the muscle enzymes. So CK, your liver enzymes, so AST, ALT, and then LDH, which is, again, just a breakdown. And then aldolase as well. for urine you want to check for if there's any protein in the urine which could tell you there's some kidney injury you can also do a protein creatine ratio for example in a patient with lupus if they have nephritis lupus nephritis then they're going to have a lot of protein urea and that's a good way to see how bad their their nephritis might be in terms of imaging you can do plain x-rays for simple joints. You can also do MRIs, which is more sensitive for early erosive arthritis detection. Sometimes won't show up as prevalently in plain x-rays, so MRIs can be really useful. Echoes, so if they have any systemic signs that is affecting their heart, then an echo will help, especially with what we talked about with the pericardial fusions and the pericarditis, that can also be seen. And then PFTs, so if they have any lung dysfunction or, you know, pleural fusions or interstitial lung disease, you can see from pulmonary function tests how bad it is. And then CT chest as well can also help you determine if there's any kind kind of mediastinal issue and things like that. Okay. That was a lot. Let's go into pathologies now. So JIA, juvenile idiopathic arthritis is the most common. This is the one I want you guys to focus on because the most common rheumatologic disease in children, and it's a clinical diagnosis. There are some supporting things that can help you, but mostly it's a clinical diagnosis. So So remember, these things that are highlighted, that's what I want you guys to kind of focus on. The age of onset will be less than 16. That is part of the definition, the criteria for diagnosing it. They have to have either one joint or more than one joint affected by arthritis. Remember what we define that as. And then the duration, super important, has to be equal to or greater than six weeks of symptoms. and that is sort of the the three major criteria and then from there there's a lot of different subtypes of jia there's um polyarthritis which which tells you that there's more than five or five joints affected and within the polyarthritis that can be um rheumatoid factor negative or rheumatoid factor positive cases of polyarthritis you can have oligoarthritis which is anything less or equal to four joints involved. You can have systemic onset JIA as well. And that usually presents with rash. That usually presents with the fever. Again, that fever that goes, you know, once every day and specifically spikes usually in the evenings. So right here, you see a chart on the side and that depicts the same thing, how the temperature shoots up. And I'm sorry, I accidentally cut out the x-axis, but the temperature will shoot up in the evenings every day, so that's what it's showing, and then the other types are psoriatic arthritis and then encytitis -related arthritis, encytitis, encytitis. okay so let's talk about epidemiology so jia has a wide ranging number um of incidents it really i mean it really depends on environmental exposure immunogenetic susceptibility variations in diagnostic criteria and then uh the other problem is that there's a lack of population-based data About 300,000 children in the U.S. have arthritis. That's estimated. And oligoarthritis is one of the most common of those subtype of the JAA. The peak onset for oligoarthritis is usually between two to four years old. For polyarthritis, which is another subtype that we talked about, it can be bimodal. So this peaks in two to four years of age and then 10 to 14 years of age. And then usually systemic JIA usually happens between one and five years of age. There is no *** predominance for systemic JIA. However, most other subtypes are girls. Girls are more effective than boys, except in the case of endocytitis, which is then more common in boys. The etiology is a little bit complex as well. Remember, we talked about multiple involvements, but there's a complex genetic trait, which usually affects both the humeral and the cellular immunity, MCH1 and 2, and then also your protein tyrosine phosphatase non-receptor. TNF-alpha is involved, IL-6 is involved, IL -1 is involved. It's usually some sort of a double hit where you get some sort of external factor that triggers the abnormalities in your immune system, which then causes everything to just go awry. T cells are recruited for non-self synovial antigens, which then cause that inflammation cascade and then add B cells and complement all kinds of inflammatory things. um in the uh this picture is a biopsy of a synovial joint in a 16 year old child with oligo jia and you can see the infiltration of lymphocytes which are i mean if this was colored it would be purple stained and then also plasma cells which are your your mature b cells making all the antibodies so you can see that they all kind of aggregate in that area and then cause inflammation, and destruction of the joint. Okay, these are all the subtypes that there are. Remember, we talked about the oligoarticular, which peaks between one to three, and it has more female predominance. It affects the knees more than the ankles. There can be some uveitis present. ANA will be positive in 60% of populations, and usually inflammatory markers are normal or slightly elevated, but not terribly. And then it also lists the therapies. In general, you can remember the therapies as things that calm down inflammation, right? So it's going to be NSAIDs, but avoiding aspirin, because aspirin has its own problems in kids. So NSAIDs, like naproxen, ibuprofen, those, and then usually some sort of a immunosuppressant to calm down that that autoimmunity that they're experiencing. Sometimes you can bridge them with steroids as well, which can help with acute inflammatory instances. Then it goes through the polyarticular, the two types, RF negative and RF positive. It goes through psoriatic, which we talked about a little bit, which we'll touch on. And then the systemic one is last here, where we talked about it's a peak onset between two to four. It's equal incidence, males and females. It's usually polyarticular. Often the knees, wrists, and ankles are affected. You can have a daily fever, which we talked about. I have this rash, pericarditis, pleuritis, hepatosomatomegaly, lymphadenopathy. For your labs, it's going to show you anemia. It's going to show you increased white count, increased inflammatory markers, ESR, CRP, which goes along with increased ferritin as well, because that's also an acute phase reactant, which is also why the platelets will also be elevated. Okay. And also for this, the treatment is going to be standing NSAIDs. And then you can add on systemic steroids or IL-1 antagonists. Okay. Moving on. Okay, so still on JIA, the joints affected, so usually oligo is going to be larger joints, polyarthritis is usually going to be both upper and lower joints. Remember, it can also affect your TMJ, and also cervical spine can be involved, and there could be hips also involved. And then we talked about the treatment a little bit. We talked about the NSAIDs. We talked about naproxen, ibuprofen, meloxicam. You can do DMARD, so disease-modifying drugs, specifically methotrexate. And this is given either sub-Q, so subcutaneous or PO, so by mouth. And usually it's a weekly methotrexate administration. And this is different than when you guys learn about neoplastics, when we give methotrexate for cancers, we usually give it higher doses and more frequently. So, almost every day or really high doses of infusions of methotrexate. And that's a little bit different than what we're doing here. And when you use methotrexate in a lower dose and a weekly dose, you're achieving more immunosuppression than you are doing, you know, ablation. You can also use biologics like we talked about a little bit with anti-ILA receptor antagonist or anti-TNF-alpha biologics. You can also do intra-articular corticosteroids, so injecting corticosteroids into synovium directly. You can also do systemic steroids, but generally we want to avoid overusing them because they do have side effects like we know. It usually is very helpful in bridging therapy before sort of the biologics and DMARDs start working. Okay, so this is a picture at the top with the unilateral knee arthritis going on in a young infant. Luckily, with the steroids, when they're on it for about six weeks, 40 to 60% of patients get better with their symptoms. Of course, we want to make sure that they're eating something with these NSAIDs, and then also we're monitoring their kidney function. And then the methotrexate is really great for avoiding systemic steroids. It's about 70% effective, and usually we'll give it with some sort of a folic acid supplementation, like a one milligram with it. And then you guys will do your research when you do antineoplastics about why we give folic acid with it. Uh, when the patients are on methotrexate, you do have to check a CBC level to make sure you're not myelosuppressing too much, which means decreasing the cell lines too much. Um, and you should also check LFTs because the, uh, the liver can be irritated by methotrexate. Um, the other pictures I have are, um, the one at the bottom right here is a CT scan of, uh, the TMJ joint, the temporal mandibular joint of a child who has JIA. And you can see the degradation on the right side, which is uneven compared to the left. Everyone see that? Okay. And then the last picture I have for you guys is a 13-year -old with severe hip disease. You can see all this degradation of the nice, smooth -*** tabulum and the femoral head that you should be seeing. You also see some joint space narrowing right here specifically. It's really close together. It's rubbing together, and that's going to cause a lot of pain. You can also get subluxation. So this hip looks like it's coming out of the socket, right? And this patient received corticosteroids systemically for about nine years before this got better. Yeah. Okay. So let's talk about prognosis. The goal is obviously disease remission. We talked about this statistic already. Oligo arthritis fares better than polyarthritis just because there's less joints involved. But it also depends on how bad the joints are affected, if they have the things that we talked about, the complications like subluxation, joint space narrowing. um, the earlier the age when they present the, um, the higher their, uh, uh, mortality and morbidity become. Um, and then, um, also, but then it helps because the sooner you treat these patients, the better you can get them in remission. Um, and then if the patient is RF seropositive, that's also a poor prognostic factor. Um, if it involves the hip wrist or hand, generally that's also a poorer prognosis. Some complications, we already talked about this a little bit, but the one thing I will mention is the uveitis is super important because persistent uncontrolled uveitis can cause chronic scarring and then eventually blindness. So, you can definitely have ophthalmology follow these patients and they can do intraocular steroids or even drops that also help with calming down some of that inflammation. Um, with joint destruction, you're going to have some, you could have some contract, uh, contractions, contractors, sharks, sorry, contractors. And then also you can get microognathia from the destruction of the TMJ joint area. Um, and then leg length discrepancy, which is what we talked about when there's destruction of one side and not the other. Um, this is an example, this picture of, uh, rash that could be present in a systemic JIA. It's erythematous, it's macular, so that means it's flat, right? So it's red, it's flat, and it also kind of comes and goes, especially during periods of fever. It can be more prominent, and it can also show on the trunk and extremities, which is what you're seeing here okay okay so um for classification uh and naming the two main um kind of schools government government bodies governing bodies are the international league of associations of room classifications which is your ILR and then your American College of Rheumatology so the ILR is more international use and the American College of Rheumatology is more American study-based. So as you can see, JIA and JRA are sort of used depending upon which class you're going by. And then the other difference is that the subtypes are a little bit different. The categories include in the ILR one, they include psoriatic arthritis and the anthocytitis-related arthritis disease, whereas they don't include that in the American College of Rheumatology classification. They also don't include the ankylosing spondylitis or the inflammatory bowel disease or things like that, whereas that is included in the ILR classification. So just things to keep in mind and how sometimes different things are. But the things that they do agree on, of course, is the age, the duration, and then, of course, the systemic J aspects, which are fever, rash, and arthritis. Okay. Let's briefly talk about anthocytitis-related arthritis. The classification criteria are you have to have arthritis plus anthocytitis. I can't not saying this for my life. And remember, that's just the inflammation of the tendon that attaches to these joints. And these are the anatomical areas where you're more likely to see ERA. You can see that in the sacroiliac joint, and that can cause inflammatory and pain, inflammation and pain in the lumbosacral area. It usually has presence of the HLA -B27 gene. and then usually this is an older male like older than six year old male and you can have accompanying uveitis is very common usually you'll also have one family relative with the HLA-B27 associated disease in a first degree relative remember for diagnosis you only need two of these to be diagnosed with ERA usually for six months of disease are asymmetric which means that only one side will be affected. And then they'll usually have less than four joints affected totally in totality. So the small joints of the foot are highly suggestive of ERA. So classically, you'll see it and you can see it in the skeleton as well as this back Achilles area, and then also the bottom of the foot. Okay, so these are the spondyloarthritases. There's a lot of overlap, and I feel like juvenile ankylosing spondylitis is very similar to ERA, so that's also really confusing, but we'll try to do this together. You also have your juvenile psoriatic arthritis, and then your inflammatory bowel disease, and reactive arthritis is also in this chart, just for comparison. As you can see, you get peripheral arthritis in all of four of these categories. You can have HLA-B27 positivity, more likely in juvenile, ankylosing spondylitis, reactive arthritis, and then also inflammatory bowel disease. Your ANA is probably going to be more positive in the psoriatic arthritis. The axial arthritis is basically of the spine or sacroiliac joints or hips arthritis related. And that's going to be most common in juvenile ankylosing spondylitis. But you can also see that a little bit of that in psoriatic inflammatory bowel disease, but very less common in reactive arthritis. You can see anterior uveitis in all of them, in all of these diseases. Skin manifestations more commonly in psoriatic arthritis. GI, of course, inflammatory bowel disease, but also you can see in reactive arthritis as well. And then inflammation at the site of the tendon, ligament, joint capsule, the anthocytitis that we just talked about is going to be more common in in juvenile ankylosing spondylitis and remember in the classification ira doesn't even separate uh juvenile ankylosing spondylitis with um anthocytitis so um that's something to think about because they are very similar okay let's talk about juvenile ankylosing spondylitis so usually um you'll have a uh a male that's older than six years of age, you'll have the uveitis, you'll have the HLA-B27. So you guys see the overlap, there's a lot of overlap. And then 90% of the children with juvenile ankylosing spondylitis will have that HLA-B27. So it's a very strong indicator that this could be the etiology. You'll get the sacroiliac joint tenderness and the inflammatory lumbar sacral pain. So in this picture at the top, you can see that this patient isn't able to bend all the way down. And that's because the lumbar sacral spine has lost some mobility from having ankylosing spondylitis because the lower spine remains straight while this patient was trying to bend forward. It frequently begins with oligoarthritis and enthesititis. And then, again, the criteria is called Modified New York Criteria, but you need either both of them or you have either one of them with two of the following that we all just listed. Again, the family history also can be important. These are the character six of inflammatory back pain. So it does not improve with rest, improves with exercise, which is the opposite of musculoskeletal pain. it's insidious in the onset and it has a good response to NSAIDs. So treatment will be to control the inflammation, preventing the ankylosis, which is that fusion of the bones, which is what you see why this patient cannot bend forward, and that you're going to do with disease-modifying drugs and also NSAIDs. And then physical therapy, of course, can also help strengthen those muscles and loosen them so that the patient can have better range of motion. The prognosis for this disease is, so if the disease has been ongoing for more than five years, then the disability is very likely. So you want to catch it kind of earlier and you want to treat it earlier to have these patients be in remission and so that they don't progress to this kind of prognosis where they've had it for more than five years. And now disability is very common and remission is only possible in less than 20% of those patients. All right, moving on. Psoriatic arthritis. So this one is characterized as it's unique is sort of the skin findings, right? Like we saw in the chart. So you'll see nail pitting or oncololysis. And you can also see dactylitis. So these little fingers will also be swollen and arthritic, which you can see in B. So sausage fingers of the toes. And then also the specifically these two toes look a little bit, sorry, these toes look a little bit more sausagey. And then you see some nail pitting in C. And then in A, you see that classic psoriatic rash, which is erythematous plaques with a silver scale, which is what you'll see. Usually for diagnosis, you need both arthritis plus psoriasis. For the other way to diagnose it, if you have either psoriasis or arthritis, then you need two or more of the following that we talked about and this disease really peaks during preschool and early adolescent years and this this was a patient for a nine-year-old with with psoriatic arthritis so okay let's talk a little bit about reactive arthritis so you guys I know learned this from a an adult point of view and you learned the classic you know phenomenon on, like can't see, can't pee, can't climb a tree. So can't climb a tree, you got arthritis, you can't pee, you have urinary complaints, and then also can't see, which you have the uveitis. So this one is usually defined as joint inflammation caused by sterile inflammatory reaction after a recent infection three days to six weeks prior. Usually in kids, though, those three things that we talked about, the mnemonic, is not exactly applicable. Usually, it's more systemic signs like fatigue you can get rashes um so like cutaneous manifestations like erythematous oral macules plaques erosions erythema uh erythema endodosum fingertip erosions um and enthesititis and then the dactylitis as well um arthritis is usually asymmetric so um and and you can see a little bit of the swelling of the posterior aspect of the heel it looks way worse on the left than it does on the right. And then some of the bacteria that can cause these symptoms or can cause reactive arthritis is Salmonella, Shigella, Yersinia, Campylobacter, GU infections with chlamydia, E. coli, and C. diff are a little bit less common. The E. coli and C. diff are less common, but GU infections like chlamydia can definitely trigger reactive arthritis. Also, some viruses like adenovirus, CMV, EBV, HSV, paravirus, and rubella can also cause reactive arthritis. 75% of these patients will be HLA-B27 positive. The treatment for this is usually NSAIDs, but again, if they have an ongoing chlamydia infection, you're going to treat the chlamydia. So let's talk about some mimicers, which again, like I said in the beginning, they like testing you guys on and they'll give you a couple of things that will separate it. So acute rheumatic fever, remember, is usually caused by untreated group A strep infection. And usually it's two to four weeks after the strep infection or epitigo or things like that. And you're going to look up the Jones criteria and all the things that are included in there. And that in the question stem will help you differentiate because again, that can also present with migratory polyarthritis or multiple areas that are affected by arthritis. You also don't want to miss Neisseria, gynecoccal arthritis. This can usually present with rash, fever, polyarticular migratory arthritis. And usually it's in a ******** active person. And the treatment for this would be ceftriaxone. Remember, Lyme arthritis, like we talked about, it can be a late manifestation months or years after the Lyme exposure. So people won't really remember, oh yeah, like years ago, I got bit by a tick. Sometimes they might, they might, but usually they won't. And so getting some titers can also help with that diagnosis. And usually the arthritis will be in the knee. So it kind of mimics oligo, articular J. You can also get pyogenic or septic arthritis, which is acute symptoms of inflamed joint. Usually it requires an aspiration of the joint fluid, which will show you increased wide blood cell count and neutrophil predominance, which are signs of infection. So if they give you a question stem, they give you arthritis, but they give you the joint aspiration, the studies, and those are consistent with infectious stuff when you think about septic arthritis. And the treatment for that would be to drain the fluid and also to treat with antibiotics. All right, let's talk about pediatric onset lupus. So compared with adults, kids have more severe disease and widespread organ involvement. So when I was a resident at Montefiore, we had a couple young females, adolescents who were admitted for lupus, um, flares. And so I did get to see some of these patients. Um, and it is really, it is really sad, um, kind of all the multi-system effects that they can have. Uh, and usually they involve multi-system, um, disciplinary, uh, teams. So the renal team is usually involved, um, the, um, the immunology team slash allergy team is involved. Uh, if, uh, They have any kind of cardiac manifestation. The CARDS team can also be involved. So compared with adults, like we talked about, in adolescence, they're more likely to present with the renal failure or nephrotic syndrome, which is why there's another reason. That's another reason why kids have more severe disease that can have more widespread organ involvement. The prevalence of SLE in children is about 1 to 6 out of 100 ,000 kids, and it's highest among African, Asian, Hispanic, Native American descents. Childhood lupus before the age of 5 is very, very, very rare, and that could actually clue you into an immunodeficiency problem. and then the median age at diagnosis is going to be about 11 to 12 years of age and about 20% of lupus patients are diagnosed before the age of 16 which is why it's important for pediatricians to know what the signs and symptoms are for lupus. So the most common presenting sign like we talked about is fever, fatigue, hematologic abnormalities, arthralgias, arthritis is usually symmetric it can be polyarthritis including large and small joints and then neuro complications are actually really difficult in peds patients too because that can present with irritability and hyperactivity kind of anxiety depression all those things that we normally see in these patients as well so antiphospholipid antibodies can be found in about 66% of pediatric SLE patients, which again, remember, puts you at more risk for being more thrombotic. And then the treatment is hydroxychloroquine. The etiology is a little bit unclear how it works, but we have found that it works really well. Avoiding sun exposure. You can also do steroids for acute flares, methotrexate, biologics. And the prognosis for five-year and 10-year survival rates really depend on how much money the country has. So in more well-resourced communities, the rates are 99 to 97% of survival rates, whereas in lower income countries, that goes to about 85 to 79%. In the pictures above, you see in the Grap A. Right here at the bottom, right here, you see that malar rash that goes across like a butterfly rash, right? You see a little bit of vasculitis in the toes. You can see that hard palate ulcer and then the discoid rash as well that you can see. Here is also another example of the skin manifestations that you can find. Remember, the sun exposed areas will be a little bit more prominent. um what else and then the alopecia is what we talked about before as well all right one cool thing i want to talk about is called neonatal lupus and um this is really interesting because it's actually not an autoimmune disease of the newborn but actually happens because mom transfers her immunoglobulins through the placental blood barrier so remember IgG can cross over because it's small enough. And so if mom has anti-Rho and anti-Law antibodies, they can actually cross over into the fetal circulation. Most moms, interestingly, are asymptomatic from these antibodies, and about only 50 % will have a defined lupus or Sjogren's diagnosis. So in babies, this presents with a malar rash, which you can see right here in the bottom picture. You could also see dangerous things like congenital heart blocks, and that can range anywhere from type 1 to type 3 heart blocks. I hope you guys can review that from cardiology. They can also have cytopenias, so affecting their red blood cell count, white blood cell count, and platelets, and then also hepatitis from this. The pathophage is really interesting because it's thought that the Rho and Lott antigens, which are on cardiac cells, specifically in the AV node, which is what the anti -Rho and anti-Lott antibodies cross and then attach to. So that can cause fibrosis of the AV node and then varying degrees of the block. Remember, AV node is where most of your heart blocks will be transmitted and how they show up on EKG. Um, so this, um, if the patient, if the baby has complete heart block, which means that there's no, uh, communication between the SA node and the AV node, then, um, you're going to have, uh, you're going to need, um, pacing, uh, because again, your atria and your ventricles are not contracting appropriately and in coordination with each other. So you can have really inefficient blood flow, you're going to do, you can give IVIG, which has shown to be occasionally helpful, and then steroids. If they have cardiomyopathy associated with it, it's usually a really bad prognosis, and they usually need a heart transplant. The data is really mixed for using steroids and IVIG to lower the anti-Rho and LA, and then sometimes antibiotics can help prevent, oh, sorry, antibodies. Antibodies can further help prevent occurrence in the future child, which the prevalence is about 15 to 20 percent. So you're blocking the antibodies from doing their job using IVIG. So the IVIG that you give them will bind to the anti-RAW and LAW, preventing those antibodies from creating damage in the baby. In prenatally, you can detect heart abnormalities by doing an echo. And then it is helpful to see the P's cardiologist prior to this. The great thing about this is because it gets through mom, usually you could just, you know, wait for mom's antibodies to kind of wear off, which happens about six months. And then the baby doesn't, would not have any long -term sequelae from that unless they have complete heart block or signs of heart block. Sorry, the complete heart block would be the worst. So, and then avoiding the sun. So usually, remember, this rash is going to get worse with sun exposure. So avoiding that. Okay, let's quickly run through the rest, because these are very similar to the ones that you get in adults. So juvenile dermatomyositis. So again, you get that proximal muscle weakness, distinctive rashes of the faces, extensive surfaces. Here at the top picture right here you see the um the groton uh groton papules uh which are the hypertrophic pale red uh kind of lesions um there's about three cases in about a million children in the first year um and then the peak onset the peak onset is usually at seven years of age females are more prevalent than males and there's some genetics that is involved but really is a combination of genetics with environmental factors um children with uh with juvenile dermatomyositis either present with rash or weakness or both um and then usually uh the uv light exposure with generalized erythema is very very common um which is seen in the shawl sign the helotrope rash the um the gattron papules and then the mechanic hands um which is what you guys usually see the helotrope rash is the same one that you can see in, um, in adults. And then remember that the erythema crosses the nasal labial folds, which is different than lupus. Okay. Um, a little bit more. So usually the weakness is systemic, uh, muscles such as neck flexors. Remember proximal muscles involved. So shoulder, shoulder, uh, hips, um, so combing hair, climbing stairs, getting out of bed, this will all be hard. Um, you can get esophageal and respiratory muscles also being affected. So sometimes if you're worried about that, a swallow test can be helpful. If you're worried about the respiratory muscles being weak, then you have to make sure they're not going into hypercapnia, which can then really lead to hypoxia. These people will not show any work of breathing, which is really scary because of their muscle weakness. So you often need an NIF, which is a negative inspiratory force machine, which helps you kind of keep those alveoli open and can see how bad your respiratory drive is getting. The EMG, which is the muscle, electro muscle, like the thing where they put the needles and then see the muscle signals. So basically, that will show signs of myopathy or weakness of the muscles. If you get histology and you get a biopsy, that's going to show you inflammation, necrosis. If you get serological testing, usually it's ANA positive. Sometimes you get x-rays, you can see calcifications, which you can see grossly, but also in the x-rays itself. um and then rf the rheumatoid factor is usually negative but you will see um anemia and usually your esr which is long-term uh inflammation will be actually normal um the treatment for this is gonna be the same thing steroids um methotrexate sometimes you can do ivig usually the peas rheumatologists are managing this um but ptot avoiding sun those are all shown to be really helpful um the mortality is actually pretty less like one percent but really little is known about long -term consequences, but they do respond really well to therapy. Okay, so Bichette's disease, this is a spectrum of symptoms, but remember, it's vasculitis. It's auto-inflammatory in nature. It's about 10% of the adult prevalence in kids, so not very common. The mean age for symptoms about 8 to 10, and there's family history is positive, usually about 20% of cases. um remember the the ******* ulcers that you get with pitets usually those healing kids with scars uh whereas the old the painful oral ulcers don't don't usually scar um anti-uve you've anterior uveitis very very common and then erythema endosum or that that calm um the non-specific rash is also very common so you have to meet one of the three criteria which is what's listed on the side um For eye disease, we like to use azathioprine, and then we use topical treatments for the ulcers. Their mortality is actually pretty low, unless they get a pulmonary aneurysm, which can then increase their mortality. Sjogren's, really quick. Again, it's the parotid gland and the eyes. You get dryness of everything, so you can get inflammation of the parotid gland, *********** of them. very, very common in Sjogren's. And that's what kind of separates it from all the other things. You can have symptoms like systemic symptoms, like fever, adenopathy. You can get dental caries a lot in kids because of the result of dry mouth. You usually have to get some sort of imaging of the parotids and then also biopsy, which will show you lymphocytic infiltration. And so for this clinical diagnosis, you need about four of the 12 items that are listed here in order to be classified with having Sjogren's disease. You'll have an elevated ESR, positive RF. You can get increased immunoglobulins, and then you can have SSA or SSB antibodies that are present, which are your Roman laws. The treatment is artificial tears, massaging the parotids, doing lozenges and fluids, steroids, NSAIDs, hydrochloroquine, so about the same. um scleroderma can be in two flavors so systemic or localized you guys know this it's really rare in kids um but mean age onset is about seven to nine it's more common in females um there's only about 10 percent of kids who have systemic most most of the cases are localized um and then systemically you can have pulmonary fibrosis myocardial involvement myopathy joint pain all that stuff um and then if it's localized it'll just be limited to the skin the sub-q tissue These are all signs right here of crest and skin findings. Okay, and the last thing I want to talk about is familial Mediterranean fever. This is an autosomal recessive variant, and specifically it's an amino acid protein. In Greek, that protein is named for fever. So usually this gene is found in granulocytes, monocytes, and fibrolovas, and it can cause autoinflammatory disease. So this occurs primarily in Mediterranean ancestry, Jewish, Turkish, Armenian, Arab, and Italian patients. It's characterized by short recurrent one through three days of fever, cirrhitis, arthritis, and rash. Most are present with symptoms in the childhood and about 90 % before the age of 20. um again it sounds exactly like all the rheumatological conditions right um but the thing that differs is that in between these episodes of fever rash arthritis you'll have periods where there's no symptoms at all um and that can help you as well to think about it um and then the frequency of attacks really depends so it can vary from you know weekly to one to two flares per year. And usually we do prophylactic colchicine, depending upon how bad the flares are and the severity and intensity of the flares. This is just the minor criteria for diagnosis. And then this is just the erythema rash that you can get with it. Okay, in summary, I know it's really confusing. I know they all sound the same. But what I want you to take away is sort of this summary page. So JAA, remember, that's the one I want you guys SNL, younger child, there's so many different types. Remember the systemic type, okay? For ankylosing spondylitis, it's going to be a male. It's going to be SI joint pain. You're going to have HLA-B27 positivity and restriction in range of motion. Psoriasis, you're going to have the nail pitting, the findings of joint pain and rash. Reactive arthritis, they're going to give you some history of having a previous infection. Uveitis, very common. HLA-B27, very common. For pediatric SLE, so lupus, you're going to have multi-organ involvement and all your complementar markers will be decreased and inflammatory markers will be increased. Vachette's has that nice ******* and oral ulcers, uveitis, and remember it's a vasculitis. Juvenile dermatomyositis has the rash and the muscle weakness, the proximal muscle weakness, right? Sjogren's will have the parotiditis, and then the eye dryness, and then scleroderma will have the calcinosis and the fibrosis, which can either be cutaneous or systemic. Okay, so back to our question. So I'll give you a second to read it over, and then we're going to talk about what blood work we would want, or what blood work we would see. So this is the diagnosis, the systemic JIA, because remember you have the penicillomegaly, you have the lymphadenopathy, you have that daily fever and the rash accompanied with it. You're fitting into the JIA diagnosis because the patient's less than 16. It's been going on for more than six weeks. So that's all good. And then your lab work is going to show an elevated white blood cell count. It's going to show inflammatory markers are elevated. It's also going to show anemia, which kind of says here with the conjunctiva being there. And then you can have elevated to normal platelets, again, because that acute phase reactant. And we're going to treat with NSAIDs, so like naproxen, not aspirin, naproxen. And these are my sources. I do recommend watching Lecturio Medical on YouTube. It's for GIA. It's really good. It's really comprehensive. And it's a quick kind of overview of everything if the lecture doesn't fit with exactly how you learn, right? You should cater it to how you learn best. Please do the feedback form. That's how we know if we're getting better. This is your education. So again, it's really important for you to fill out feedback so we can try to change it if it's not working for you or you have some suggestions on how to make it even better. Okay, thank you so much, guys. I really appreciate it. Thanks.