Hello, everybody. Good afternoon and welcome to the lecture on clinical decision making. My name is Dr. Richard Morgan. I'm the DPR1 coordinator. And what I'm going to be doing today is presenting a lecture on really the thought process that goes behind how we work through a case. You know, we've done a little bit of the ICC patient encounters. We've started to work on soap note writing. We're going to go into a little bit more on illness scripts. But what this lecture really entails is the systems, the thought processes by which we as physicians go through to come to the ultimate conclusion about what our diagnosis and ultimately our plan is going to be with each patient. So what are the objectives for today? At the conclusion of today's session, the students should be able to, one, define dual process theory of cognition. We'll go over both system one and system two as the leading model for explaining clinical decision making. We'll be able to apply these concepts of problem representation, illness scripts, and pattern recognition. Three, we'll demonstrate knowledge and application of diagnostic reasoning processes. And four, we will distinguish between the different types of clinical cognitive errors that sometimes people make on a basic clinical vignette. Now, as physicians, we gather history and perform an appropriate physical exam based on the reason for the patient seeking care, right? So the first thing we do is analyze the findings to identify potential causes for the patient system using our clinical reasoning skills. The potential causes become our differential diagnosis, the possibilities for what brings the patient to your office based on that cheap complaint. Your list always starts with the most likely, including other plausible options that will explain the patient systems. And it can include diagnoses that might have serious complications or consequences if missed, because you certainly don't want to miss those at all. For example, patient with acute chest pain rating to the left shoulder should be thought of as an MI until proven otherwise. You don't want to miss something that is potentially life -threatening or lethal if not diagnosed and treated immediately. Now, clinical reasoning and clinical decision-making is based on two pathways. So the first pathway is, if you look at this slide to the left, is more of the intuitive system. It's a faster system that uses something called heuristics. which is mental shortcuts. And we'll get into that a little bit more in the coming slides. It's something that builds up over time that physicians tend to utilize after years of practice, years of experience. You start to build up a knowledge base of all the past cases, all the knowledge put together through schooling, residency, fellowships, whatever you might have done. And over the hundreds and hundreds of patients that you start to see, you start to come to a hypothesis very quickly. And that's part of the intuitive system that utilizes heuristics. As I said, I'll get into that a little bit more. The second pathway to the right here is the hypothetico -deductive pathway. This is a much slower pathway. It uses more logic, more probability to come to a conclusion or diagnosis. Now, this is the system as you're starting out first, second, third, fourth year medical school, you're still building up your knowledge base. It's a slower pathway, but it uses more logic and probability to come to that conclusion or diagnosis. This is the more likely system for most of people who will utilize this type of staging at this level of education, because you're still building your knowledge base. And this will help you discern various seized processes a little bit slower, but a little bit more logically. Once you're in practice, however, most physicians will regularly move between both systems one and system two with their clinical decision -making process. Now, as I said, heuristics, that system one involves mental shortcuts. It's used to assist a clinician to rapidly make decisions. It's generally subconsciously formulated in a response patterns based on formed habits. You see something, you get familiar with it, you intuitively know what it might be. It's also, of course, subject to error because of a lot of our cognitive biases. And I'll give you an example here. I'd like you all to look at this three pictures. Now, what are these three pictures of? I'll give you a moment. now obviously you look at these three things these three objects if you will and we we know that they're chairs okay this is part of that heuristic system that i was talking about before through all of your experiences as adults you've seen many chairs you've seen hundreds if not thousands of chairs you've sat in chairs you become familiar with them you know what they're about you know what they're utilized for you have a good sense of a working knowledge of how they're utilize. However, if you take a child, you know, a very, very young child or an infant, however, they may not know what these are. They haven't had those life experiences. They haven't had the chance to sit in as many chairs or see as many chairs as they would have, you know, if they were much, much older. But like I said, that will build up over time. Therefore, when you see these chairs, you're using more of the heuristic sense of thought process. And a young child who does not, is not familiar with these, is more likely to use System 2. Hopefully, this example will help. Okay, so what are we going to be doing for the remainder of this time? We're going to be breaking down, okay, the key elements of clinical decision making, okay? We follow a same pathway, and we're going to break each of these down, starting from the patient's story all the way down to the diagnosis, and how do we configure and put all these things together? What are the key elements of clinical decision-making? The first part is the patient's story. Now, a famous person once said, if you listen to your patient tell their story, they will also tell you the diagnosis. And that is relatively true. I would say the majority, especially within the subjective component of any patient interview, most well-versed clinicians and well -knowledged clinicians should be able to identify the information that will lead to the diagnosis in most cases just from the subjective. Let's look at the patient's story. Gathering that initial health history and physical exam. Now, we started going into this when we've been in the ICC recently, and we started doing this with some of the soap note writing in class. Gathering this initial health history involves the symptoms elicited during history. What brings the patient to your office today? What are the key elements? And what are the associated symptoms with that chief complaint? What are some of the signs that are both normal and abnormal observed during the physical exam? In other words, what are the pertinent positives and negatives that you can elicit that would help you come to the diagnosis? Then with the laboratory or diagnostic reports that they may have had in the recent past, you can also combine those with the other elements from the subjective history to help confirm whatever diagnosis you might be thinking is most likely. Of course, you want to be organized and methodical so all abnormal and unexpected findings are identified. OK. Next, let's move on to data acquisition. So data acquisition really is a system which helps you narrow the focus of the differential diagnosis based on a variety of data. So what are you compiling? What are you putting together? It uses essentially clusters of information. OK. I'll give you an example. Okay. Take a child. Child comes to your office. A child is tugging on their ear. Okay. Child tugging on their ear. Mom reports that they've been having some tenderness in that area. It's likely to be associated with that particular anatomical structure is where the diagnosis will be likely coming from. And that's what we mean by anatomical location. So organizing interpreting clinical information involves approaches to organizing findings. As I said, anatomic location, cluster findings based on the anatomical relationship in the body. Child comes to your office, they're tugging on the ear, all the symptoms are based in that region. Common things occur commonly. We can talk about zebras down the line, but when you put your ear to the ground and you're hearing hoofbeats, you're looking for a horse, not always a zebra. And when a child comes in pulling in the ear, you want to think the most common and logical things. Two, age. What disease processes are common in different age groups? Now, you might want to acquire the data in different ways. So a child coming to you with, let's say, chest pain versus a 45-year-old that comes to you with chest pain, the differential is going to be different based on the age and epidemiology of what type of person develops chest pain at those given ages. So age is important with data acquisition because it leads to different differential diagnoses based on the categories. Three, timing of symptoms. Knowing how different disease processes as well as duration of certain disease is definitely important. Now, sometimes diseases can last, you know, a couple of minutes. Symptoms can last a few minutes to a few hours. They can last two days to three months. Knowing that that timing will often give a much broader idea or a much more narrow idea, I should say, of what the likely diagnosis will be. And, of course, involvement in body systems. Now, if a patient reports chest pain, you're likely going to want to start with the cardiovascular system and then branch your way out asking some basic associated symptoms. But if a patient comes to you with just a constitutional complaint, such as fever, night sweats, unexplained weight loss for six months, these are much broader kind of complaints that would lead to a wider variety of involvement of different body systems or multi -system conditions. So your differential is going to be much over a broader scope than narrow, where if it's a child coming in, as I said before, with an ear tug or a 45-year-old with chest pain radiating to their jaw or to their left shoulder, those types of things are much more narrow focused, but the broader we get, the more wide, you know, much more larger blanket we need to use to cover all the possibilities. So how do we organize and interpret some of this information? Well, we also want to look at accurate problem presentation. So what does this exactly mean, right? This is also the student. This is also the student that essentially sums up your assessment, right, of the patient with the corresponding reasoning as to why the physician feels that this is the correct diagnosis. So we want to present the problem with the case. So synthesizing and developing the problem presentation. You basically make sense of all the information gathered to this point and form a problem presentation or clinical picture. It's almost like a one or two sentence oral presentation based on the combined information given. It concludes the initial information, such as chief complaint, epidemiology, and risk factors, also the key features in the history and physical exam, as well as the results of diagnostic testing. In your clinical documentation, the problem presentation is also called the summary statement that often starts the assessment section of your note, okay? There's also, you can review this in Box 5, 2, and Bates 3rd edition and try writing a problem presentation of your own. Generation of a hypothesis. Now, what exactly do we mean here? Okay. can you begin? This goes to what is the thought process behind when you start to actually determine what the differential is, all right? So a lot of times what we'll have you do is before we even give you the case, before we even go through the scenario where, as we do in DPR lab, one of your pod leader will play the patient, and all of you will work together in a round-robin format to ask the appropriate questions in an interview format. Before we even do that, we give you the doorway information, which is the vitals, and we ask you just based on the vitals, what can you put together as a possible hypothesis? So we want you to start to gather and start the CDM, the clinical decision-making process, before you even see the patient, before you even walk in the room. We want you to start generating hypotheses. Yes, they'll be broad. For instance, if we give you a set of vitals and all there is is a fever, that'll give you some idea that there could be some infectious process going on. But obviously, without having seen or spoken to the patient yet, there's still such a broad range of what the possible differential could be. But as soon as they tell you the chief complaint, as soon as you start to ask you questions, this is what I mean by you'll start to be able to really narrow down eliminating certain possibilities, including and excluding others and ultimately getting to a clinical decision okay so here we go generating that hypothesis for each identified problem or cluster of problems you want to generate the clinical hypothesis for the underlying cause or diagnosis as i said you start by just looking at the basic doorway information you you give yourself a differential or some thoughts as to what could be going then once you start to interview the patient you do the same thing and you can narrow each time you start more broad and you get more narrow as you go through. Again, in Bates' book Box 5.3, here's some approaches for searching for probable causes of findings. How do we determine or make a composite list, if you will, of a differential based on just a general number of findings, okay? Generating exhaustive lists is the first thing, and then matching findings against all conditions that can produce them. Ultimately, as we go through our interview, we will be able to eliminate diagnostic possibilities that will fail to explain those findings. Then we want to weigh the competing possibilities and select the most likely diagnosis, given special attention to potentially life-threatening conditions. So what am I referring to here? So what we want to do is this is a great tool, a great memory aid for a patient who, let's say, presents with a diagnosis, a chief complaint of chest pain. Okay, let's just take chest pain. Here's a memory aid for generating a differential diagnosis. This is an exhaustive method. So if a doctor says, what's the differential on a patient with chest pain? What you do is you're using mnemonics such as this. There are many, many mnemonics. I learned different ones in my residency. I used one called vitamin C and D, but here's two well -constructed acronyms or mnemonics, if you will, that give you a full layout for generating a differential diagnosis. So patient comes to you with chest pain and you're trying to include what the possible differential could be without knowing anything else. You go through this list and it includes all the various systems and etiologies for where this chest pain can be generated from. And you start with, the one on the left here is Tom G. Prince, MD, and that includes toxins and trauma, oncologic. So chest pain, let's say it could be a myxoma, tumor in the heart, right? MSK, rheumatologic, okay? It could be, you know, pericarditis, or not pericarditis, but yeah, it could be a costochondritis for chest pain. GI. So for a patient presenting with chest pain, it could be GERD, right? For pulmonary, it could be a pulmonary embolism. So what I mean is you're going through this list with the chief complaint of chest pain and trying to correlate a specific diagnosis based on all the systems presented here. This is a great tool to use as a third and fourth year medical student on preclinical rotations, as well as on rounds. Like I said, once you memorize this and get familiar with how you can degenerated differential, this is really going to help you on the road going into your preclinical rotations. The one on the right is just a different form. It's a little less exhaustive, but still is very inclusive with the various acronyms that it uses, such as Vindicate, vascular, infectious, neoplastic, drug-related, inflammatory, idiopathic, iatrogenic, which is doctor induced and then finally congenital autoimmune or allergic and trauma toxic or endocrine and metabolic so like i said pick anyone you don't have to pick you know five of them you pick one that works for you that's comprehensive and thorough i like tom g prince md i use vitamin c and d as well i can go over that in class but there's many many different ones that are used by students throughout. So keep this in mind and pick one that really works for you. So generating the hypothesis or differential diagnosis. For each identified problem or cluster of problems, you will generate a clinical hypothesis for the underlying thoughts. So again, box three, approaching to search for probable cause of the findings. As I said, we generated our list as we did in the previous slides. We match the findings against all conditions. And then the last two points here, weighing competing possibilities, selecting the most likely diagnosis, and giving special attention, as we said earlier, to potentially life-threatening conditions because we don't want to miss that. I'll share a brief story with you. It's a very famous story about a composer, a Broadway composer, Jonathan Larson, who wrote the play Rent. The week before the play was to come out, actually the night before, he presented to the ER in a city hospital complaining of chest pain. The doctors examined him, they did a thorough examination, and their initial feelings was that it was either an infection or something that they gave him some aspirin and some medication to go home with, which he did. That night, he went home and he ended up collapsing on the floor and dying from an aortic aneurysm. His aorta split open and he bled out and died at home. And it was missed. And the fact is, this is one of those cases where you needed to consider a possible or potentially life -threatening situation. These sorts of things, although rare, you don't want to miss it. And if there's any suspicion at all, trust your gut, weigh all the information that's presented to you, and make sure you do a thorough evaluation before coming to a conclusion. Okay. Okay. Next part of this will be search for and selection of an illness script. So what is an illness script? It's something that we're going to start to introduce to you moving forward in the coming weeks and certainly in the next semester. And I will explain a little bit about what they are if you haven't heard of them. An illness script, excuse me, is an organized mental summary of a clinician's knowledge of a disease. It essentially lays out everything about that disease in a very short fashion that gives you the bullet points. It'll include pathophysiology of the disease, epidemiology, time course, salient symptoms and signs, diagnostic tests used to diagnose, as well as the treatments for that particular disease. And at NYTCOM, we also will include osteopathic considerations, which is something you could find in some of your texts and resources here at the library and in your OMM course. now close your eyes let's try this example when you close your eyes and picture a firetruck what does it look like to you what color is it what's the shape of it i'll give you a moment is this sort of what you picture obviously we have the red truck we have the ladder this is something we've seen over the course of all of our lives as young children adults hearing the sounds you can almost picture the sounds and that that fire truck moving you know down the road right so this is something you've seen on tv shows you've seen in person you know who's driving it you know when when they're coming about when there's a fire right so this is something you're used to seeing now what if i showed you this picture instead and asked you to tell me what it is now it doesn't look anything like the one i just showed you It's yellow. I don't see a ladder. I don't see any firemen. But the fact is, this is a firetruck, okay? Not one that we're normally used to seeing. So the equivalent of this is what I talked a little bit about before, like zebras. We know what we expect to see based on heuristics, mental shortcuts, and our history of looking for things and knowing what to expect when we hear certain key words, catchphrases. All right, that's the heuristics I mentioned earlier. But sometimes you do get zebras, and this is not something that you would have expected, but it's also a firetruck, and it's important to note. And what's the correlation of this? The fact is, similar diagnoses and assessments that present with a chief complaint can often present differently, but ultimately lead to the same conclusion. And it's important to evaluate each case individually, looking at all the data and not making assumptions, although it's easy to base it on our history of utilizing the same data we've had in previous cases, because everything's based on our knowledge and experiences. But as we start to put that together, we want to become more cognizant of those zebras, of the things that are presenting slightly off or differently that won't always appear as the classic case, right? You know, if someone presents with chest pain radiating to the jaw, we know what we're thinking. It's like that fire truck, that red fire truck. We know that it could be an MI, it could be something cardiac related. But if I tell you that the patient just feels, it's an older patient that presents with fatigue, and they just feel a little lightheaded, and they have a history of diabetes, turns out they could still have an MI. Because a lot of times, older patients don't always necessarily present with chest pain. And it may not always be in the same presentation, but ultimately it would be the same diagnosis. The point is that you need to gather all the information, put together the whole history to come up with a conclusion without jumping to conclusions, if that makes sense. Components of the illness script, okay? As I talked about, this is a sample illness script. So this is an illness script on community -acquired pneumonia, all right? It includes epidemiology and pathophysiology, and you see what increases the person's risk with, the time course, how long it lasts, The salient signs and symptoms, fever, cough, shortness of breath, tachycardia, and so on and so forth. What diagnostic labs are used to diagnose community-acquired pneumonia and ultimately the treatments. As I said before, we would also include osteopathic considerations, which will include what somatic dysfunctions most likely present in the case, What findings would you would you consider pneumonia for or what what somatic dysfunctions are most commonly associated with that particular disease state? OK, last component or key element. This is the diagnosis. Right. So this comes down to how do we reach our ultimate conclusion? Right. Assessment of diagnosis. Now, from a documentation standpoint, and this is something that you'll be doing, going into your CSAs, going into the Ferrara Center and simulation lab encounters that you'll be doing through this year and next year. Once you go through these cases and ultimately complete and compile an entire SOAP note, this is still early on in your careers as medical students, but starting later on in your spring semester, in this semester, you're going to be asked to compose the assessment and diagnosis. And when we write an assessment, you always want to list the diagnosis in the assessment section of the note. Now, what does this include? The diagnosis may be very straightforward. It could also be more challenging and require further information to get to that file diagnosis if there are multiple causes for the patient's condition. You want to be as specific as the data will allow. For example, subarachnoid hemorrhage, unspecified versus subarachnoid hemorrhage, left temporal lobe. As you can see, there's different ways to label it. A simple diagnosis. So for an assessment, the patient presents with chest pain, as we've used this example before. What could the diagnosis be? It could be stable angina. It could be unstable angina. It could be myocardial infarction. It could be pericarditis. It could be gastroesophageal reflux disease or GERD. There's a large number of possibilities in the differential diagnosis, but you want to be as specific as possible based on the information provided in the note. You don't want to give a diagnosis such as dehydration or weight loss. Those are more symptoms or part of a problem list. So you really want to put the assessment as your most likely diagnosis based on the information provided to your ultimate conclusion that you're trying to reach. Now, planning the diagnostic and treatment strategies. The plan of care should be logical flow from your working diagnosis listed in the assessment section of your note. What does the plan always include? So once you've done your assessment, now you have to compose a plan based on that diagnosis. These are not always, this is not an exhaustive list, but includes many of the things that you will find as part of your plan. And when you're writing your soap note, these are the components. You can start with laboratory tests that allow you to differentiate between two potential diagnoses and guide your therapeutic management of the patient. This could be a CDC, a CHEM-12. If you're, as I said, with chest pain and you're concerned about a possible MI, you would order cardiac enzymes, troponin, and so on and so forth. Diagnostic interventions would be the next component, and that could include x-rays, CAT scans, MRIs, VQ scans to rule out a pulmonary embolism, to rule out a deep venous thrombosis or a DVT. We might want to do Doppler ultrasounds of the lower extremities. So those are the types of diagnostic interventions that we're talking about. Patient education or counseling. Every single plan that you write, you would want to include counseling. And what are you going to counsel the patient? Now, there's a lot of things you can counsel patients on, and I promise there's always something you could find, even if it's not always apparent. So some of the things that are very common are found in the social history of the patient, the fed tacos we often talk about. That could be diet. That could be eating a better diet. Picking a specific diet is always something that you can do. Get comfortable with understanding either the DASH diet, the Mediterranean diet, or any one of the more approved diets that you can have a good working knowledge of and educate keep the patient on that will help them in their counseling. You can counsel them on smoking or tobacco or illicit drug or even caffeine cut down or cessation. So cutting down on anything that could be considered a risk factor for causing whatever symptoms they may have, which is to improve the overall quality of life. These are things you want to counsel them on. Other things you can counsel them on are even in the healthcare maintenance component. You can actually counsel patients on, you know, if they're a 50-year-old male and they had a father that had colon cancer, yet they've never had a colonoscopy, you can counsel them on healthcare maintenance and understanding that it's about time that they consider getting a colonoscopy, especially since there should have gotten one at 45 or 50. But still, it's something that you can help to work on counseling a patient, not just for the components of the social history that may be, you know, a little bit more of an outlier or even, like I said, the healthcare maintenance components. A woman who's 50 years old, has never had a mammography or is behind in their testing for certain types of cancer. Those are the types of things that you can counsel them on as well. Medication changes. All right. So take a patient who's hypertensive. They've been on medications, but they come in and their blood pressure has been running high for the last few visits. you want to consider changing, increasing, or altering their medications. So that's something else you can counsel and work on with them as well. So again, patient comes in with chest pain, you find out that you're concerned about a possible MI, and because they have a lot of risk factors, you're going to want to refer them, probably to a cardiologist, let's say, for an echo and a stress test. So referring a patient out to a specialist is something else you want to consider here. um also the follow visit every single note should always have a follow visit and it should be fairly specific to the working diagnosis if a patient comes in with chest pain and you're trying to rule out a myocardial infarction you're not going to want to come have them come back in four months or six months you want to have them come back within the net within the past within the next two to four weeks or sooner depending on when they you referral to the cardiologist occurs where you can review their lab work and whatever testing might have been done. Now, the one thing that's not mentioned here that I did want to include is pretty much every plan should also include or offer OMT or osteopathic manipulative treatment based on the OSC, the osteopathic structural exam that was given in your objective note. So make sure that you do include that as well. And of course, looking at this, you want to make sure that the plan is safe, that it's cost-effective, that you're not doing unnecessary testing based on the setting that you're in. Now, again, we talk about chest pain. If you don't think it might really be a chest pain that's a cardiac event, and it might just be gastroesophageal reflux, and you're thinking, all right, maybe I want to order cardiac enzymes. Be mindful that you wouldn't order cardiac enzymes in a setting like a clinic. You'd want to actually refer the patient to an ER or someplace where they can be closely monitored, especially if you're trying to rule out a significant event, if those risk factors give you the reason to want to do a testing like that. Diagnostic errors. Diagnostic errors have been implicated in 15% of clinical decisions with medical-legal repercussions, and this goes to the case that I mentioned before. And a lot of times it's doctors who use either System 1 or System 2. Sometimes doctors feel very confident in system one. They don't use as much logic and reasoning, but because they have so much experience seeing a patient with that particular presentation, they kind of use more of a narrow provincial approach, if you will, towards the diagnostic process, such as I mentioned with the Jonathan Morrison case. Of course, it was an outlier and a zebra, and maybe not every patient presents with chest pain that's automatically considered a searing aortic aneurysm. But the fact of the matter is, it's something that you need to consider if any of the other signs are there. Misdiagnosis is the potential to cause serious harm to patients as it sets up a cascade of subsequent mistreatments. You start with one wrong thing, and then it cascades down into a litany of other treatments that kind of takes the patient, veers them off course from what the original likely diagnosis would have been. All right. General medical counsel and other entities advocate that med students need to be equipped with critical thinking skills in order to identify their own cognitive biases and those the clinicians they rotate with. So just keep all these things in mind. You know, as you go through your four years, you're going to be using both of the systems we talked about, the heuristic system, as well as a hypothetical approach as well, more logical and time consuming, but more thought provoking approach. And both systems are important, but you need to be able to kind of discern without, you don't want to make, jump to the conclusions, you don't want to pigeonhole yourself into one specific diagnosis and always try to leave your options open and always consider other possibilities, whether they be life -threatening or not. common diagnostic errors here's some kind of clinical errors or cognitive errors we often see um give you an example you have anchoring bias here tendency to potentially lock onto salient features in the patient's initial presentation too early in the diagnostic process this is something that we often do you know patient presents with back pain you often think of one thing we don't we might think it's just a lumbar sprain but we also don't we're not going to run conclusion that he's having a searing aortic annulus. I'll give you an example other than yet here. The clinician locks onto a patient's description of an aura that perceives their headache as indicative of a migraine and fails to recognize red flags of increased intracranial pressure that could prompt neuroimaging for this patient. You know, we see or hear certain things that trigger a diagnosis from something you learned in med school, but we need to encompass all the components of the doorway information and the vitals to all the subtle nuances in the case that could lead us to possible other diagnoses. We'll do another example here, availability heuristics. Assumption that a diagnosis is more likely or more frequently occurring is more readily going to come to mind, such as we say with that mental shortcut we talk about. And the example here is in a clinician who has recently seen several patients who present with maybe right lower quadrant pain that's indicative of acute appendicitis does not consider ovarian torsion in an adolescent girl presenting with acute right lower quadrant pain. You know, we see things, we hear things, we're experienced in certain components of what we see on a regular basis that we tend not to always include the epidemiology or the age or ***, gender, or the patient that might actually play into the possible diagnosis. Confirmation bias, seeking supportive evidence for diagnosis at the exclusion of a more persuasive information that can refute it. So the example here is a clinician makes a presumptive diagnosis of a URI and a well -appearing patient presenting with a cough, rhinorrhea, and fever, but doesn't consider pneumonia even after finding an asymmetric chest wall excursion and don't list the chest percussion on examination. We want to take all the knowledge that we we gather in the entire subjective and objective components to get the best diagnostic possible and it's hard not to want to you know jump to conclusions because we get excited we want to we oh yeah i read about that in med school i i got this this is oh they got rebound they got guarding they got pain in the right little quadrant this is definitely you know appendicitis or whatever it might be so you always want to keep an open mind move slowly don't let heuristics take over and don't use as much logic and reasoning to confirm what you're thinking is. And as long as you use the right amount of both systems, then you'll be okay. So let's go down to one more down here. Let's go to representation error. Failure to take prevalence into account when estimating the probability of diagnosis. Okay. Clinician often sees older patients, places diverticular bleed high on the differential when evaluating ****** bleeding in an adolescent patient. This is common in the clinic, especially if you're used to seeing the same epidemiology or age patients. If you're a geriatrician, let's say, you're going to see a lot of GI bleeds possibly due to diverticulitis. If you happen to see a younger patient, your mindset, you jump to what your experiences are based on those diagnoses without incorporating the epidemiology and statistics of a younger population. And you need to kind of put it all into play. Okay. So this is just a couple of samples. You can look through these on your own as well and realize that it's so easy to jump to conclusions if you don't use the proper thought processes. Okay. Reviewing steps and strategies for clinical reasoning. Starting again, like I said, data gathering, history taking, physical exam, results of the investigation. Then we do our problem presentation, highlighting the key features of clinical and investigated data and synthesizing all this data to formulate a clear story. Then we do our hypothesis generation with the acronyms I mentioned before, with that exhaustive list of differentials. Obviously, you want to prioritize the list based on the clinical knowledge and formulating the most likely and least likely diagnoses based on the information presented in each case. Then we talk about the illness scripts, right? searching for illness scripts generated from prior clinical experiences. It's a great way thing you can save, collect them, use them to help study, but also gives you all the data you need for that particular disease process and applying that knowledge appropriately to whatever current patient has based on their chief complaints. And then finally, your diagnosis. Sorting through all this data, applying your knowledge from the illness scripts, narrowing the differential based on the information you gathered, and generating a possible final or at least a likely diagnosis if possible now what we'll do is we'll have you practice i will stop here i will give you i will put the slides up and i'd like you to kind of practice these cases okay this is one case and it's going to use all your applied knowledge from the last few slides so i'm going to leave about 10 seconds with each slide i'll let you practice this and you can kind of do this on your own And if you have any questions, don't hesitate to reach out to me. It's been a pleasure imparting this information to you, and I hope this has been helpful. And you can reach out to me. My email address is on the first slide. So I'll leave about 10 seconds with each of the next few slides to allow you to pause it and then save it and practice what we went over today.