Hello everyone. Welcome to my lecture. Today we're going to talk about the general sensory systems. In this hour we're going to talk about the somatosensory system including the detailed receptors and their encoding. We're going to cover in more details about the pathways you know for touch and proprioception as well as pain and temperature. So you know these are So we're going to cover from the peripheral, you know, the receptors and up all the way to our cerebral cortex, this entire pathway. We will talk about the lesions as well as their clinical symptoms relevance. Please make sure you read the detailed objectives in the CPG as well as the scholarly research. brick. Back to the Comlex blueprint, we can see that the sensory disturbances and pain is a pretty important chapter of the blueprint. So it's including tactile disturbances, as well as, you know, vibration, temperature, proper suction, as well as all sorts of pain, you know, chronic and neuropathic. So make sure you really study hard for this section. In the USMLE blueprint, very similar. So you see the different types of sensory modalities being covered, as well as the abnormal processes, including different types of pain syndromes, you know, a long list of things. There are different sizes, sheath, and speed of the afferent fibers. Showing here, as you can see from left to right, you know, you have different types of fibers, and so they have different characteristics. First of all, I'd like to point your attention to, you know, different diameters. You can see here, this one is very large diameter versus this, the smallest one, you know, the C fiber, right, has a small, much smaller diameter. And also these purple aspects, these are myelin sheets. And so the different thickness of myelin sheets, as you can see, you know, from left to right, you know, getting smaller and smaller. And then you also have the C fibers that's kind of unique. It does not have any myelin sheets. So these are C fibers are called unmyelinated fibers and you know the difference among these setup is actually made at the conduction velocity so when you have increased diameter and increase the thickness of myelin sheath you're going to have increased conduction velocity so for these fibers as you can see you know these alpha motor neurons will conduct a lot faster compared to the c fibers you know myelinated fibers and their speed can be you know about 100 fold difference among different fibers based on the conduction velocity as well as the axon diameters we could divide these peripheral fibers into myelinated and unmyelinated fibers as you can see here you know on the left you have the fastest fibers on the right you have the slowest fibers and it's correlated with the diameters you know so largest diameters on the left will have the fastest velocity so those two parameters are connected very closely and there are two different way of categorizing these fibers you can see here the a fibers are the myelinated fibers and then the c fibers are unmyelinated fibers and then you know these are correlating with different types of a fibers like a alpha would be the largest diameter you know compared to the c fibers so you have type a fibers that's correlating to a alpha and then you have type 4 fibers that's correlating to the c fibers so you don't have to remember the axonal diameter kind of categorization but i'd like you to at least remember the a and c these fiber division systems okay so here are the fibers you need to remember for the myelinated fibers we have a and then for unmyelinated fibers we have C and under this A myelinated fibers we also have fastest A-alpha fibers that's mediating the proprioception as well as the motor function if you recall at the spinal cord ventral horn there are alpha motor neurons those are these type with alpha fiber these neurons has the largest diameter thickest myelin sheath so they're conduct conducting the fastest. And A-beta fibers are for the touch fibers. So when we are talking about DCML, touch and proprioception, they're alpha and A-beta fibers, so largest diameter fibers for the DCML pathway. For the pain and temperature pathway, dull pain and temperature are mediated by the C fibers and i want to point out one more thing for the sharp pain so you know initially when we feel something real fast those kind of sharp pain is actually mediated by fast conducting fibers a delta fibers they're not as fast as the touch fibers but they are thinly myelinated they're still significantly faster than the c fibers the c fibers also mediating itch and also postganglionic autonomic neurons if you remember the autonomics we talked about the gray remus and the white remus so you know the gray remus is these non-myelinated postganglionic neurons and then for the preganglionic fibers they're actually b fibers so this is the one that we haven't really talked about before but you need to remember that b fiber is the pre -ganglionic autonomic fibers for visceral sensation showing here if you record from a nerve that you know the electrical change you know the voltage change from the nerve you would be able to see these the different types of fiber and then forming different waveforms so if we gave a strong electrical stimulus to the skin so it's like an electrical shock to the skin then you're going to be able to record three different forms you can see the fastest one you know the initial peak comes in very large peak these are mediated by the a alpha a beta fibers for touch and per perception and then you know shortly after that you're going to see the second peak these are the a delta fiber mediated still fairly fast and you know then you see the third third wave you know much smaller magnitude and was a very long delay so that's c fiber mediated so if you imagine you know when we're receiving some electrical shock you would feel something real sharp you know it's like a pin prick and then you just withdraw your arm for example then uh that's the uh fastest fiber mediated by the a delta fiber that type of pain and then after that you're going to realize oh it's a bit burning at the skin surface too so those would be mediated by the c fiber so faster for the sharp pain with a delta and then slower with c fiber that would be the dull pain and then different types of fibers mediating different sensory modalities now let's talk about the diversity of the receptors for the somatosensation by receptors i mean the initial very beginning of the sensory apparatus so we talked about the fibers earlier right so those are either large or smaller diameter fibers have the neurons you know with the cell body and then sending the axons on both ends you know peripheral and central end so the receptors would be the ones the apparatus that are located at the initial part of these peripheral sensory fibers these apparatus can sense different types of sensory modalities you something in the eyes like rods and cones would be different from the hair cells and then would be different from the skin right so you would have all sorts of apparatus to sense different types of sensory information so we're going to talk about them individually in the following slides or lectures and you just need to know them in general for this lecture we can categorize different receptors by their source or their the types of stimuli so the source of stimuli kind of give us the three different categories of receptors they're called intero receptors extero receptors and proprioceptors so you can kind of you know figure out the meaning by the name, interoceptors receiving the internal stimuli generated within the same, you know, within our body. For example, the bio -receptors that we mentioned in our autonomic lectures, so it's sensing the blood pressure, you know, the change, the stretch of the smooth muscles, and those internal stimuli will activate the interoceptors. Exteroceptors are the general receptors that we had in mind right when we are sitting on something when we're touching something those receptors are activated so exterior receptors are the general ones that we are all familiar with probe receptors are the ones that sensing the change of the body positions like receptors that joins you know they're kind of special based on the types of stimuli there are chemo receptors photoreceptors, thermal receptors, mechanoreceptors. Based on the name, you can figure out what are the sensory information they are activated by. So another special one that I want to mention is called nociceptors. So nociceptors is not limited to individual stimulus, but it's actually any kind of a stimulus that are reaching the harmful or hurting level. So when there's high intensity, either mechanical, thermal, chemical, whatever, that can produce harm, then these non-succeptors would be activated. Okay, let's look at the different types of sensory sensors. First, let's look at the touch sensors. We call it touch. It's actually a little wider than touch. It's more accurately being expressed as exteroceptors because they are sensing the external stimuli, also called mechanoreceptors. All kinds of mechanical stimuli, such as touch and pressure, vibration, they're all included in this type of receptors. There are four different kinds that I want to highlight. So Meissner's corpuscles, you can see different morphology from the Merkle disk and also the proscenium corpuscle and ruffini endings. They all have a different kind of morphology at the end. So let's look at their functions. Okay, let's look at the touch receptors in more details. As you can see here for the receptors, you have something like shallower, like Meissner's corpuscle and Merkel cells. You also have the several different kinds that are deeper in the skin away from the surface of the skin. So there are proscenium's corpuscle and Ruffini's endings. So, you know, based on the position, you can kind of imagine, you know, these at the surface, they're mediating touch. you know like light touch and fine touch discriminative and so they require smaller receptive field right so the receptor receptive field for these surface receptors are much smaller and fine-tuning you know higher resolution compared to these uh pursinance corpuscle or ruffini endings they have much larger receptive field and because they're mediating vibration and pressure they don't really require that high resolution the fine-tuning of the sensory modality and and then for each small or large receptive field receptors you would have fast adapting and slow adapting differences so meissner's corpuscle is fast adapting you can see when you record you know when the stimulus is applied you have a train of action potential and it stops quickly. Versus with the slow adapting the Merkle cells, after you give the stimulus, you're going to see a train of action potentials, you know, slowly slowing down. That's the slow adapting. And similarly for the proscenium corpuscle, it's much, you know, like a quicker have the action potentials, then it disappears. Versus the Ruffini endings, you would have a train of action potentials slow adapting how do you remember this you can kind of remember them by you know alphabetical order so m and m those are smaller receptive field and then you know p and r you know later ones deeper they have the large receptive field and then uh you know it's also alphabetical cmei versus mer right so those are the fast versus slow adapting receptors and p is a fast adapting large receptive field and r is slow adapting large receptive field so hopefully that helps you to remember these and the two-point discrimination has been used for uh determining the touch sensitivity you know the receptive field as you can see here you know it's basically using the two stimuli applied at a certain distance and ask the experimenter you know are you able to tell these are two different dots and then if they can then you just keep shrinking those distance between the two points until they couldn't tell whether it's one or two and that would be the receptive field for that area so as you can see here our fingers has a much smaller receptive field compared to our back you know you have a much larger receptive field for the touch sensation and so why is that this actually reflects the density of those touch receptors so when you have the packed highest that would be at the fingertips right it makes sense that during the daily life we need a much finer sensation you know be able to tell what are the different things touching our skin at our fingertips compared to at the back you know you don't usually need to use the back too much in terms of you know sensing those stimuli so you know these are areas that need it the most has the most density of the touch receptors to help provide that high resolution small receptor field now let's look at the pro-perceptors these are the special receptors that are transmitting the properception information. As you can see here, when the muscle spindle fires, you know, showing here in the red rectangle here, when the muscle spindle fires, you know, so showing the contraction of the muscle, then the gorgy tendon organ that's located at the edge of the muscle spindle would be able to fire and transmit the information about the lens of the contraction of the muscle fiber and the contraction. And the joint receptors are also able to fire if there is a change of the angle of this joint. And so basically the joint receptor is able to sense the large degree of the extension of the joint. How do tendon organs sense the force at the tendon? You can see here these are kind of yellowish gold color these are the golgi tendon organs and they are the free nerve endings kind of winding through the collagen and then you know showing here an enlarged image like these are the golgi tendon organs they sense the pulling force at the junction joint receptors are sensitive to the angle of the joint and they're insensitive when the joint is in normal range. You know, for example, here at 100 degrees, there is barely no firing at all in this in these joint receptors. And when there's extremes and or inappropriate directions, you know, for example, For example, when the degree become 140 or when there's maximum extension, then the firing goes crazy. So that's the feature of the joint receptors. We mentioned that nociceptors are special, so they are actually responding to all kinds of stimuli as long as the intensity of the stimuli are beyond the normal range. you know when it's potentially producing harm that's when nociceptor is firing. You can see here there is two types right you have the first pain and then you have the second pain so the you know this is happening the first pain happens immediately and then the second pain has a long delay and then it has a long lasting painful sensation. So these are mediated by two different fibers so a delta fiber is the one that uh remember it's thinly myelinated so transmitting faster and it's uh you know giving us that first pain and the c fibers are the slower unmyelinated fibers that give us that slower second pain uh give you a classic example so for example when we're touching a hot stove and so your fingers are you know immediately quickly sensing that sharp pain and that would be mediated by these A-delta fibers and this sharp pain is actually, you know, lead to the spinal reflex. So you're withdrawing your finger immediately before you even realize, you know, there's a pain and then you just kind of have that fast response within the spinal cord and then you realize oh it hurts and then later on after that fast pain dissipated you're going to experience some slower pain you know it's kind of a dull aching and you know it lasts for a long time even during the development of the blister So that's our second pain mediated by the C fibers. We all have those sense that when you have something like, you know, when a nurse injecting the vaccine to your arm, they kind of rub the surroundings to help reduce that pain. So the principle is that when you have the touch neurons activating an interneuron here, it will be able to inhibit these projection neurons that transmitting the painful sensation from the C-fiber. So basically, this projection neuron is activated by the C-fiber but inhibited by the interneuron that's being activated by the touch sensation. Therefore, the total or the sum of the signal is reduced. So you have a reduced activation of the projection neurons for the painful signal. Now the pain responses are really tightly modulated by the descending structures. For example, midbrain, palms, medulla, they all have the projection neurons sending down to the spinal cord. We'll go over that in the next slide. We talked about midbrain PAG, peri -acredactyl gray, is able to activate the LC as well as the raffi-magnus to release norepinephrine and serotonin to inhibit the spinal cord, modulate the spinal cord projecting neurons for the painful sensation. So it produces profound inhibition of the pain. You can see here encephaline being released by these projections from the PAG, LC, or RAFI, and release the encephaline of the interneurons in the spinal cord. And that's why when the nauseous sector is being activated here, the projecting neurons are receiving both inhibitory input from these interneurons and the activation of the primary ather neurons. I'd like to talk a little bit about itch. So itch sensation is also mediated by the C fibers. It's different from pain, but it's mediated by the C fibers as well. And why that scratching can help reduce the painful response, I mean the itchy. And we actually have the similar type of theory that the pain inhibits itch, just like touch inhibits pain. So with the collateral interneurons that produce inhibitory signals, this is similar as a gate theory as we talked about previously. So the itch can be either histamine sensitive or histamine independent. The histamine independent type of itch is very hard to treat. Okay, now let's summarize our sensory receptors. Pause the video, give yourself a few minutes to fill in these blanks. And here's the answer. Hopefully you got them all correctly. okay let's do some practice questions see if you can solve this question pause the video here and here's the answer hopefully you got it right okay we've covered the sensory receptors and the fibers in the periphery now let's go back and then look at the entire pathway the ascending sensory pathways now do you guys remember what are the you know dcml and spinothalamic tracts mediating what kind of signals do they transmit so the answer is the dcml is transmitting the touch and proprioception and spinothalamic tract is mediating pain and temperature sensation so these are different sensations have a commonality so as you can see here you know drawing there are three neuron relays so you have this first order neurons at the peripheral and then sending the information into the spinal cord then it's a sent to synapse at the secondary order neurons in this case in the DCML case the secondary order neurons is located in medulla and then they will ascend again to the thalamus to meet with the third order neurons and then the thalamus you know neurons will go ahead and and go to the somatocentric cortex which can be considered the fourth neuron but usually we just say the relay takes three neurons and if you put together what fiber we you know mediate in this pathway if you remember our touch and proprioception has these uh large diameter a alpha or a beta fibers right to mediating touch and proprioception they're large diameter heavily myelinated fibers and then on the receptor side uh they have the you know very specialized the that's a meissner corpuscle miracle cells and so on so that's the receptor and the special fiber that's coming in and then for the spinostalamic tract you also have this primary aferring neurons coming from the periphery and then synapse right away to the secondary order neurons in the spinal cord and then again it has a third order neuron in the thalamus you know to be more specific that would be the the vpl right for the body and then it reached the somatosensory cortex neurons we can either call it force neuron or you know just kind of know it's the neurons in the somatosensory cortex that gave us that final sensation so in this case for the pain and temperature sensation the primary A-fair neuron would be that C fiber, right? The slow conducting unmyelinated fibers, or the fast pain is mediated by the A-delta fiber, which is a thinly myelinated kind of fast conducting, but still slower compared to the A -alpha and A-beta fibers for the DCML pathway. All right. So here is a primary afferent. That's our first order neuron. And remember, we talked about the cell bodies of those first order neurons is located at the dorsal root ganglia DRGs. These DRG neurons has a special name called pseudo unipolar neurons. The reason that they are pseudo unipolar because it looks like bipolar. You know, they look like two branches of axons. In fact, this is pseudo-unipolar because they only have one axon that, you know, from the cell body sent out to the central terminal, to the spinal dorsal horn. So this peripheral afferent fiber is actually not an axon. That's why it's called pseudo-unipolar. and so these axons you know comes into the dorsal horn of the spinal cord if there's any damage to these pathway you know for the primary afferent then you would have ipsilateral deficit for the for the sensation the secondary order neurons sending the axons out and always the secondary order neurons are having the decosition so if you recall we talked about the secondary order neurons for the pain and temperature sensation is located right at the spinal cord dorsal horn and then it passed the midline through the anterior white commissure and joined the spinal thalamic tract. For the touch and proprioception, you have the receptors ascending isolaterally without synapsing to the secondary order neurons until reaching medulla. and when it reached the medulla it will synapse at the two nuclei at the medulla level and then use the DCML the medial laminiscus part so this is the dorsal column part within the spinal cord the medial laminiscus is passing the midline to the other side and then the signal goes up to the thalamus the damage at the spinal level for these two different tracks are causing two different lateralizations of deficit as we talked about in the spinal collector it's the lateral loss of touch and perception and then contralateral loss of pain and temperature sensation and so But when you have the damage that's above the decosition, right here, above the medulla level, then all of these areas would generate the contralateral loss of both sensations. Now let's go through these special sensory pathways one by one in great details. The first one is spinothalamic pathway. Spinal salamic pathway is transmitting the pain and temperature information and also itch. So here I put a stop sign for the facial or cephalic information, so you can ignore that at this point. We're just going to talk about the body somatosensory information. So here the primary afferent has their cell body located in the dorsal root ganglion, or DRG. so the signals coming from the peripheral reach the cell body and the central terminal of this sensor neuron will synapse at the dorsal horn and you know to send the signal to the secondary order neurons the secondary order neurons uh remember we talked about they are passing the baseline passing the midline make the decosition so these order neurons passing the anterior y commissure to reach the spinal thalamic tract so this spinal thalamic tract is now formed on the contraladder side of where the input initial sensory input coming coming in so this spinal thalamic tract goes all the way up to the thalamus do you remember which nucleus that for the body sensation for the spinal from the body in the thalamus so here it's actually called vpl right so vpl is for the body sensation and now reach the third-order neurons, so synapse at the third -order neurons. And these neurons will send the axons out to the fourth neuron at the primary somatosensory cortex. So this pathway is using the internal capsule. To be specific, it's a posterior limb of the internal capsule to reach the primary somatosensory cortex. So because of the decusation happens very early on at the spinal level, therefore, the damage to the spinothalamic tract almost always cause contralateral deficit. For the DC-ML pathway, so DC is dorsal column, ML is medial lamniscus, it's because of the true part of this pathway. So the primary atheric neurons again comes in, you know, bring the peripheral information for touch and for perception to the spinal cord. It does not synapse, but instead it's going up all the way to the medulla, brainstem medulla, and synapse here to the secondary order neurons located at the nucleus gracilis or nucleus cuneatus. The two nuclei is separated because the nucleus gracilis is receiving information from the lower body. as you can see here and the cuneated the nucleus cuneatus is receiving information from the upper body so this is part of the fasciculus cuneatus that uh receiving the information from the upper body and now you can see the cervical spinal cord dorsal column has two parts the fasciculus cuneatus and the fasciculus gracilis. So this is a dorsal column. And then after it passed the secondary order neurons, sending out the axons across the midline, remember, secondary order neurons is a one-decosate, right? So this neuron passed the midline and formed the medial lemniscus pathway. Now it goes all the way up to the thalamus. Again, the thalamic nuclei that's in charge of the body sensation is VPL. So it synapses here to the third-order neurons in the thalamus, and the thalamus sends out the axon to the somatosensory cortex, that's the fourth neuron there, to have the sensation for the touch and perception, again, via the internal capsule posterior limb. So if we have damage at the spinal cord level, then you would have the deficit that's in the ipsilateral side of the body with a touch and perception. But if you have damage above the medulla, then the deficit would be on the contralateral side. Let's talk about the facial sensation. So on the face, there are the main sensory fibers are trigeminal nerve, right? The cranial nerve five. And so there are three sensory trigeminal nuclei and one trigeminal motor nucleus. So there are a total of four trigeminal nuclei. And among these three nuclei, you have the principal or main or pontine, these are the same things, you know, different names. These trigeminal nucleus is located at pons. It's for the touch and proprioception. And this is equivalent of the dorsal column nuclei for the DCML pathways. So those are the nucleus gracilis and nucleus cuneatus, right, located at the dorsal medulla. and so the pain and temperature signal is transmitted by the spinal trigeminal nucleus it's called spinal trigeminal because it actually extended you know from the medulla all the way down to the cervical spinal cord so but main portion is located in the medulla so this says This nucleus is equivalent to the center or the neurons as the spinal cord nucleus appropriate for the spinothalamic tract. And so they receive the non-susceptive signals, you know, pain signals as well as temperature information. The third one is a special sensory nucleus. It's called mesencephalic. Methencephalic meaning midbrain, right? So this nucleus is located in the midbrain. What makes it so special is that these are actually the first order neurons. So they're kind of part of the trigeminal ganglion neurons that's supposed to be in the peripheral, but is now located inside the central nervous system inside midbrain. So it's equivalent of the DRGs in the spinal cord. It has a special purpose, mainly just transmitting the proprioception of the jaw muscles and periodontal regions. And so these sensory fibers through the trigeminal nerve coming in, you know, without synapsing at the pulse level, but just coming up to the midbrain and, you know, the cell body is located in the mesencephalic trigeminal nucleus. and then so these trigeminal nerve you know coming in with our mesencephalic trigeminal nucleus cell bodies and then send out axons to synapse at the trigeminal motor nucleus to form this jaw **** reflex so this trigeminal motor nucleus comes back to the jaw to produce that muscle contraction and relaxation the whole purpose of this jaw **** reflex is to reduce the damage potential damage to the teeth when we chew so this jaw **** reflex it's kind of a small function but it's very useful okay let's talk about the detailed pathways for the trigeminal system The first one, pontine trigeminal pathway. This is to convey the touch and proprioception for the head and face. And so it's similar to the DCML for the body, but slightly different route. Let's go through this. So it also has the first order neuron or primary afferent neuron has a cell body located in a ganglion called the trigeminal ganglion. Just very similar to the dorsal root ganglion for the body. So trigeminal ganglion has the cell bodies, and those are pseudo -unipolar neurons, right? Send the primary afferent to the pons. You guys remember the cranial nerve, right? Trigeminal nerve is at the pons. And then enters the pons, synapse to the secondary order neuron here at the principal or pontine trigeminal nucleus. And so these secondary -order neurons, remember for the sensory ascending pathways, the secondary-order neurons are the ones sending out the axon and decasite, right? So they cross the midline, goes to the contralateral side, and then ascend from there. So these ascending paths in the midline, passing the midbrain, reaching thalamus through trigeminal laminiscus. and here at the thalamus we'll see that to the third order neurons and do you remember where exactly in the thalamus we have these third order neurons for the face and if you don't remember here is the answer right the VPM so very pretty makeup that is for the face and head sensation in thalamus so from vpm it will send the axons you know from third order neural axons ascending up again you remember the pathway here it's an internal capsule specifically it would be the posterior limb of the internal capsule so along the internal capsule it will reach the primary somatosensory cortex which is located at the post central gyrus right and here it will synapse with the cortex cortical neurons to have our conscious and sensation of the face sometimes it's called force neurons but rarely people refer that okay so now let's look at the lesions so i want to mention specifically about medulla lesion because it's special here you can you can think about you know, alongside this pathway, it's at the pontine level, right? Pontine or above. So if you have the lesion below the pounds, then you would not have the deficit for the touch and proprioception for face, right? And what about for the body? So for the body, you know, the DCML pathway already cross the midline so now would be contralateral deficits for the body right if you have the at medulla level so that's a unique um characteristics right you have the contralateral body touch and proprioception deficit but without the facial or head deficits for the touch and proprioception let's look at the spinal trigeminal pathway This pathway is even more special than the pontine trigeminal pathway because, you know, initially when the trigeminal ganglion sends the signals, these pseudo -unipolar neurons send the signals through the pons, right? That's where the trigeminal nurse enters the brain. So instead of a synapse here, it actually going down along the latter side of the palms and medulla to reach the spinal trigeminal nucleus. And here it's synapse to send the signal to the secondary order neurons. And, you know, these spinal trigeminal nucleus axons will cross the midline and then going along, going back to the pons, going across the midbrain and, you know, all the way to the thalamus via the trigeminal thalamic tract. And so here it synapses to the third order neurons, which located again at the VPM for the face, right? And then these neurons will send axons to the somatosentric cortex via the internal capsule. So again, it's posterior limb. So this pathway, you can imagine it's, you know, starting coming into the pons, but then coming down to the medulla. So now if you have a lesion at the mid-pons level, So you're going to have ipsilateral damage for the touch and proprioception, you know, which will be synapsing here at the mid-pounds level. But then you're going to have the contralateral deficit for the pain and temperature because those fibers already cross the midline and then decasited, right? so it's a lateral for the touch and contralateral for the pain for the facial sensations so it's very special type of presentation now let's look at the fourth order neuron in the primaries of metasensory cortex at the post central gyrus so there is a homunculus sensory homunculus meaning it's a small human that's shown here. You can see, you know, the foot is at the midline of this post central gyrus and then it comes in a little bit more lateral is the leg and then trunk and then, you know, on the way lateral side you have this big representation of the hand as well as a very big representation of the face on the very lateral side. So this is a small human distribution. You need to remember it. Mainly the leg is more medial, and then trunk, and then hand and face, and then the aural borings. All right, now we've learned the entire somatosensory pathways from the body and the face. You should be able to start from the receptors and then go through different nuclei and then thalamus and then cortex. Now fill in this pathways yourself. Now here's the answer. So hopefully you were able to draw those all out. Here I'd like to mention that, you know, the body for the touch, you have thalamus VPL nucleus mediating these touch sensation of the body as well as for the pain. So both of them are VPL for the body and they reach the somatosensory cortex. I have two additional pathways here, you know, from the for the pain pathways. so you have these vpm even for the body vpm and medial dorsal medial nucleus these are reaching insula and the cingulate cortex this is for the affective component of the pain affective component meaning the unpleasantness of pain sensation so similar for the face you have the two uh you know two pathways to reach these uh limbic structures to mediating unpleasantness of pain sensation uh so shown here you know why do we feel the painful response are not pleasant right why they are unpleasant is because of those two burn areas that being innervated by like the signals being sent to those brain areas. If you remember, I mentioned in our limbic structure lecture, if we do the singulotomy, so if we damage the cingulate cortex, then the person would not be bothered by the painful response, but they could still tell, okay, this is the painful stimuli, but I don't care anymore, so it doesn't bother me anymore. Basically, largely removed the affective component or unpleasantness of this painful sensation. Another special phenomenon called the phantoms of the body. The phantoms usually come from all of a sudden the loose or removal of the body part, usually extremities, due to surgery or accident. this type of sensation is related to that last body part that you still feel like being touched it still exists in your brain and a lot of times these uh sensations are painful so it's called phantom limb pain and the phantom limb pain is quite resistant to medications The cause of it is not super clear. Current hypothesis is that the cortical representation of this last extremity takes time to be reorganized. And, you know, it takes time for the brain to learn that that limb is not existing anymore. Down here, you can see a gentleman with a mirror trying to fool the brain to say, OK, even if he lost the right limb, but his unheard you know the left leg is still there and looking at looking into the mirror it's telling the his brain okay my right leg is still okay and that can usually diminish the phantom limb pain. It's a pretty strange phenomenon but you know basically you're trying to fold the brain again to ease up that painful experience. Fortunately the phantom limb pain diminishes over time and these are the review for the most part you know how do we think about whether it's ipsilateral or contralateral deficit when you have a lesion or conversely you know when you have a deficit which side of the body which side of the nervous system is lesioned so you need to be able to figure that out by now once we went through all of these pathways. And remember the general rule, when we have lesions above the decussition, it costs a contralateral deficit. When we have the lesions below the decussition, then it will cause ipsilateral deficits. If you don't remember this part, go back to our spinal cord lecture, please. Now test yourself if we have an injury at the, you know, specific levels here, then what exactly side of the deficit you're going to see. Make sure you differentiate both body and the head. Okay, so the body and head may be different in terms of which specific level for this different neuraxis. And here's the answer. I'd like to emphasize or explain a little bit more about the pontine lesions that related to the pain and temperature sensation. As you can understand that the contralateral body, this makes sense. For the face, I put both ipsi and contralateral deficits if we have lesions at the pons. This is due to if we have the pontine lesions at the very lateral side, then we most likely are only damaging the primary aferrin fibers, you know, the primary neurons, right? So that would cause ipsilateral facial pain and temperature sensation deficit. If the lesion is a little more medial at the pounds level, then it might damage the contralateral fibers, the tritaminothalamic fibers, right? And if that's the case, then you would have the contralateral pain and temperature deficit on the face. So if you have any questions, please reach out to me. and this is again a summary slide so make sure you're able to fill in the blanks here's the answer here is my answer if you have any issues and questions confused about anything please let me know we can definitely set up some sessions you could come to my review sessions to clarify these Now pause the video to see if you can solve this question. And here's the answer. Hopefully you got it correctly. Question number three. Now pause the video please and see if you can answer this question. Here's the answer. Hopefully you got it correctly. Okay, so this is a pretty complex case. This is actually Brown-Sacar syndrome. So by now, again, you should be able to figure out what the deficits are, you know, which side of the lesion this type of presentations are generated and why exactly you're seeing all of these deficits. So I have an explanation in the next slide. basically because of the loss of the sensations of this one entire segment so you would expect to have this damage to the entire side of the spinal cord we call it hemi section of the spinal cord and because this is a lower body that experiencing all the deficit so the damage has to be at the lumbar spinal cord, right? And then correlating to all these losses, you know, all these sensory losses, we are able to, we should be able to figure out these losses are on the left side of the spinal cord. And, you know, we have all these numbers correlating with the lesions. So go over these one by one. see if it makes sense to you. That concluded today's lecture. So make sure you understand all of those information and be able to fill out the answer sheet. And I know these are pretty hard materials, especially the lateralization of the lesions versus deficits. If you have difficulty, make sure you reach out to me and we can make appointment and talk individually. If you have any general feedback, comments, suggestions, send this along using this link. Thank you very much.