Hello, my name is Gonzalo Tazu, and today we will talk about the neuroanatomy of the visual system, including eye functional anatomy and vision pathways. So students should be able to describe the neural, muscular and vascular anatomy of the eye. You should also be able to describe the neural processing within the eye. You should be able to take visual pathways underlying visual perception, and you should be able to relate visual deficits to dysfunctions to specific portions of the visual pathway. Let's start with the eye. So the eye has three concentric tissue layers and a lens. So the first layer is the sclera. So in front of the pupil, this first layer is transparent, so the light can go through it. And on the other part, it's not transparent, it's called sclera. Now the second layer is the choroid. The choroid includes a vascular layer, the ciliary body, and the iris. And the third layer of the eye is the retina. The retina is divided in two parts. There is a retinal pigment epithelium, which in this section we can see it around here, which contains the blood supply to the neural retina. where the photoreceptors are located here now the space around the pupil is divided in two spaces there's the anterior chamber and the posterior chamber the anterior chamber is the space from the iris to the cornea and the posterior chamber is from the iris to the lens. So the anterior and posterior chambers are filled with acus humus. Also, it's important to remember that in looking at the retina, that the retinal pigment epithelium is where the blood supply is, Where the neural retinates separate from the retinal pigment epithelium, the blood supply to the nerve cells will be compromised, resulting in neural death and blindness. And this condition is called retinal detachment. so the eye so this is an optic element so the shape of the eye is very important to have proper proper focusing of light so the way so contrary to the cameras built by humans which are rigid the eye shape is maintained due to the intraocular pressure so So, here, the ciliary body is going to be secreting the aqueous humor into the posterior chamber, which can be seen here. This is the posterior chamber. And this aqueous humor flows from the posterior chamber into the anterior chamber. The trabecular meshwork, which is similar to the arachnoid granulations at the iridocorneal angle, are responsible for the drainage of this aqueous humor. So the endothelium -lined scleral venous sinus, which is also called the canal of Schlem, communicates directly with the venous drainage of the eye. So now on the other part of the eye, close to the retina here, the vitreous humor is filled with a gelatinous material, so pressure on the anterior eye is transmitted to the rest of the eye. So the pressure is controlled here and is applied here. So the excessive intraocular pressure is detrimental and that condition is called glaucoma. There are two types of glaucoma. One is the open angle glaucoma in which the flow of fluid is maintained however the problem is in the trabecular meshwork that there is there is a not enough or not fast enough drainage of this fluid and then the pressure increases Now, the second form of glaucoma is the close-angle glaucoma. Here, mechanically, the iris blocks the drainage angle formed by the cornea and iris blocking the trabecular meshwork. And this is a medical emergency. So it is characterized by redness in the eye, nausea, and headache associated with blurred vision. So the cornea and the lens focus the images on the retina. So focusing an image requires refraction, that is bending of light, across one or more interfaces when there is a change in the refractive index. For example, you can see this in this glass of water. The aqueous and vitreous humor refractive indices are only slightly lower than the refractive index on the lens. So the lens, although we might think that the lens is the main optical element in the eye, actually most of the eye's refractive ability is at the air-water interface at the surface of the cornea. So however, the lens can provide some accommodation. So, the eye accommodates for closed vision by tightening the ciliary muscles, allowing the pliable crystalline cells to become more rounded. So, when the ciliary muscles contract, and here we can see the ciliary muscles here in red, the ciliary muscles contract. then the sonial fibers which connect the ciliary muscles to the lens here. These sonial fibers relax and the lens acquires a more rounded shape. A more rounded shape is going to allow the light to bend more so in this case this adapt accommodate the image for closed vision so when the ciliary muscles are relaxed the these the sonal fibers are more in tension and the lens is flat because you know this is like a window so there's not going to be as much bending of the light so when the light comes from far away objects is going to focus on the retina so this process is called accommodation so the other optical element is the iris which is the aperture here that permits the light to reach the retina so the pupil is the aperture in the middle of the iris so the pupil can constrict can close and that is under parasympathetic control or the pupil might dilate and that is under sympathetic control so uh there are a different set of muscles but different control So we have these radially dilator muscles, when they'll contract, there's going to be an opening of the pupil. There's also a sphincter line where the constrictor muscle is located around the pupil when they'll contract. This is going to be like a sphincter and it will close the pupil. so smaller pupil has some advantages in that it produce larger depth of field and we'll explain that this later but the con is that there is less light entering the eyes so the aperture is smaller they're going to be less lighting less light coming into the retina however there is some advantage to that so this is a little bit complicated so bear with me so the how come pupil contraction provide depth of field of view so here we have a diagram of the uh of the eye with a lens with this end let's imagine that there are two objects x and y here we have a large pupil so in the length the object x is in focus so all the light that comes out from x is going to be focused at the retina however object y is not it's not on the focal plane it's somewhere else and what happened is you can see by the geometry when the pupil is large there's a little more light going on but the focus is going to be happening away from the retina but the actual passage of this y object is going to create a large object y so we'll see x in focus and y will be completely out of focus on blur however However, but on the other hand, a lot of light is coming in. Now, if the pupil is small, X is in focus, so that doesn't change. However, why? Because of the smaller pupil, it's still going to be out of focus, but much less so. So the size of the object is going to be smaller, so you look more as in focus. so smaller pupils allow objects that are not exactly on the plane of focus to appear focused so we'll have a deeper field of view with a smaller pupil so this is known we know this from from from cameras right so that the the iris is played the same role in photography at the aperture right so if they have a large aperture only the objects that are on the on the focal plane appear crisp and the rest appear blur however if we close the aperture both the plane the objects that are on focus and the objects that are away from that plane of focus are going to appear more in focus or more crisp however if we close the aperture there's going to be also less light coming in so and the brain should be able to adapt the aperture depending on what do you need so when we are focusing on a nearby object three things happen in a reflex manner so the convergence of the two eyes because yes because of geometry you contract the ciliary muscles so you produce accumulation of the lens and your pupil contracts so allowing larger depth of the field of view and allowing more of these objects to appear in focus and cortex and cerebellum play an important role in this near reflex. Let's now describe the neural processing within the eye. Here in the retina, we have photoreceptors. So these photoreceptors are going to respond to light. Then the information from the photoreceptors is going to travel through the bipolar cells. So here we have the photoreceptors, then we have the bipolar cells, and the bipolar cells are going to provide input to the ganglion cells. The ganglion cells are going to provide the output of the eye to the brain. There is also an internal processing in the retinue. There is amacrine cells here, and horizontal cells. And you can see that these cells are going to be combining information across multiple photoreceptors, and it's going to modify the information flow. Something that is also important to notice is that the location of these cells in the retina is reversed to what you will suppose. So, actually, the light has to cross through the ganglion cells, through the microcell, bipolar cell, horizontal cell, to finally reach the photoreceptor. So, light goes this way, but information flow goes the other way. It goes from the photoreceptors to the ganglion cells. There are two types of photoreceptors, there are the rods and the cones, and this is actually a descriptive name, the rods are rod-like and the cones are cone-like. So these photoreceptors, their characteristic is that they have very large membranes. So the reason to have large membranes, it's allowed to collect more light, because the sensitive elements in these photoreceptor cells are in the membrane. So, there are different opzines in the rods and cones. Rhodopsine is in the rods and the cone pigments are in the cones. The opzines bind to 11-6 retinal. The light is going to isomerize the 11-6 retinal to all trans -retinal that is bound to the opzine. The light-inducing isomitization of the retinal causes a conformational change in the opsin. This activates transducin, which in turn activates an enzyme, phosphodiesterase, that hydrolyzes cycle GMP. And decreased availability of cycle GMP causes the cycle GMP -gated cation channels to close. And the cells hyperpolarize. So that's interesting that contrary to other receptor neurons, these photoreceptors, you can see that the membrane potential becomes more negative when they are activated by light. Now, also you notice that the rods are larger than the cones, so this means that the rods are going to be more sensitive to light. so you need less light because there's more membrane to activate but you have better resolution with the cones we have a more smaller but less sensitive also notice that the because of the cells hyperpolarizing in response to light photoreceptor reduce their neurotransmitter release in response to light all the rods are more sensitive but they saturate here is you can see an electrical trace of the response of rod to different amounts of light and you can see that there is saturation like the level of light is increasing but the output of the rod is not increasing that is saturation in contrast the cones there seem to be less sensitive right you can see that the responses are smaller but there is no saturation so and these roads and cones play different roles in the retina because of this specialization of the different type of cell the retina is not uniform So here is a fundoscopic view of the left retina. So you can see here the optic disc. So the optic disc is where the optic nerve is going to be attaching to the retina. You can see that the arteries and veins come from the optic disc. This optic disc has no needle cones and rods. So it's actually blind. There is no light sensitive cells here. the opposite is can be said about the phobia so here in the phobia you can see that there is no blood vessels there so there's no it's only going to have photoreceptor there there is a high concentration of cones in the phobia so this is the place where we have the most accurate vision remember the cones are smaller and they are sensitive for color and there is also high concentration of rods outside the phobia so which is interesting is that the phobia which is the highest resolution area because there are not many rods there is not the most sensitive part So sometimes when you, for example, are looking at the night sky and there is a very dim star that you want to look at, you might, if you look directly at it and put the image on the phobia, you won't be able to see it. But if you move your eyes slightly away, then you're going to put that image onto parts of the retina that have the rods, which are more sensitive. And then you'll be able to see that dim star. So we said that near the edge of the optic disc is a circular portion of the retina, about 5 millimeters in diameter. That's called the macula lutea. the center of the macula is a depression called the phobia which we talk about which is particularly rich in cons color vision the central phobia is specialized for vision of the highest acuity all the neurons and capillaries are present elsewhere and the periphery you have cons and roads so you have black and white and color vision so uh well another optical or another region of the uh retina is the optic papilla as the optic papilla optic nerve penetrates the retinal layer and leaves the eye and the retinal blood supply enters and exits this creates the blind spot in the retina the blind spot is located 15 degrees temporarily from the phobia so that's in like in visual space and we are not aware of this blind spot because the nervous system fills it in here is a demonstration if you now cover your left eye and stare the plus in the green square and now move your head closer to the screen and at one point the circle will disappear and your brain will fill it in with the with yellow so you have put at that point you have put this circle into the blind spot but you we don't have an conscious perception of the blind spot our brain is smart enough to fill it out based on the surrounding images. Now, remember what we were talking about, the flow of information is in opposite direction of the flow of light. However, having the light travel to the ganglion cells and to these other parts of the retina would be detrimental for the phobia because we want to have the most accurate vision there so there what happens is there is a higher density of cones but there are no blood vessels or other cells in the light pad so the phobia is the place where the light directly impinges onto the photoreceptors and that's where we have our maximum equity so what what's the size of our phobia so you extend your arm in front of you and now look at the size of your thumbnail that's the size of your phobia that's the size where you have highest equity but we are not aware of that we have this illusion that our whole field of view has high acuity but that's not true what happens is that we come we always we are always moving our eyes like this famous picture where when we look at the face we have the impression that we are looking at this face and we have high acuity all over the face but what's happening if we look our eye movement here we keep moving our eyes around on these saccades and then we recreate our brain creates this higher resolution image but that is an illusion so that is mostly make uh bring into attention by conditions like age-related macular degeneration amd amd causes damage to the macula but spurs most of the retina so it's if you think about it like extend your arm think about that and think about the size of your thumbnail you're saying okay that that part of the retina is damaged no big deal however and you are not blind but you lose the ability to see because the loss of the central vision in amd interfere with simple everyday tasks as to the ability to see faces, to dry, to read, write and do close work such as cooking or fixing things around the house. So although the affected area of the retina is pretty small, the effect is quite large. Now there are three types of cones. The cones are going to provide us with the uh color vision so we have the uh s cones we have uh the m cones and the l cones so uh small s comes from small medium and large so here uh we are plotting the uh we're seeing the wavelength longer and shorter wavelengths so shorter wavelengths are more towards the violet or and the longer wavelengths above 600 nanometers are for the red colors so if you remember your quantum mechanics you will know that the longer wavelength wavelengths have less energy the quanta of this longer wavelength have less energy so it's actually kind of hard to design detectors that can uh to to to have detectors that take that low energy and in fact you can see that both all these even the l cones that are responsible for red vision its peak absorption is yellow green But here in their tail, they still respond to red, and they are going to be given the perception of red colors. So now looking at the output cells of the retina, they are the ganglion cells. these ganglion cells uh respond to contrast so they actually uh have centers around structure so they are more responsive for example for a little dot surrounded dark dots surrounded by light there are different type of ganglion cells the numerically dominant class of small ganglion cells are sensitive to color and form and they are large ganglion cells that are more sensitive to movement and contrast. Now we will look at the visual pathways underlying visual perception. So, visual fields and retinal fields. The visual field of each eye is the region of space that the eye can see looking straight ahead without movement of the head. So now you can look straight, close one eye, that is the visual field of one eye, close the other eye, and now that's the visual field of that eye. So the phobia of each retina is going to be aligned with a point called the fixation point in the visual field. Peripheral images fall on the nasal hemiretina. So we have the the two visual fields right so there's a left half and a right half. This is the visual field and now what happens is that the peripheral images fall on the nasal hemiretina. So here Now we are in the retinal space, and here you can see that there is a cross. There is a cross on where the images are projected. That's not a neural effect. This is just an optical effect. Remember that we have lenses, and the presence of the lenses causes the images that are projected in the retina to be inverted. So this inversion that you are seeing here is produced by the optics. so the end result is that the peripheral images are going to be uh projected into the nasal hemiretina so the part of the retina that's close to the nose so this is the periphery here and here on the nasal hemiretina so now let's just to be clear let's focus what happened on the left eye in the binocular field which is the part of the visual field that has that is seen by both eyes images in the left half of the visual field fall on the nasal hemiretina of the left eye images present in the right half of the visual field of the left eye fall on the temporal hemiretina of the left eye so let's see what happens when we are looking at an object so let's see let's imagine that we're looking at this arrow and here we have our retinas right and from the point of view of the left eye you can see how this more peripheral object is going to be projected onto the nasal hemiretina. So now in the retina, we have the ganglion cell axons which travel to the optic chiasm. So there's going to be partial decruciation of the optic nerve fibers into optic tracts at the optic chiasm that is going to permit binocular vision. So if you think about it, you can see how this part of the arrow is in the temporal hemiretina of this eye, but is on the nasal hemiretina of this other eye. In order to create a binocular representation, we need to bring together these two images that are on different eyes. So what happens, all fibers from the nasal half of each retina cross decussates to the contralateral optic tract. So in that way, the images from both eyes of the same part of the visual field can come together. All fibers from the temporal half of each retina are going to pass through the lateral portion of the optic chiasm without crossing and entering the ipsilateral optic tract. So, in the optic chiasm, anatomically, these decusating fibers from the nasal hemiretina that are going to be representing the peripheral vision are going to be in the middle. so what happens is that the um the optic chiasm is on top of the pituitary gland so a tumor of the pituitary gland will cause pressure here on the optic chiasm and what is going to be mostly affected is going to be the nasal hemiretina projections that are going to correspond to the peripheral visual field so here is an example where we can see an MRI of a normal MRI and you can see here a patient that has a pituitary adenoma so you can see here the optic chiasm and you can see how the optic chiasm is going to be pressed here in the center which is the part where you have the fiber decusation so in that case the symptom that you will get from this pressure is going to affect the temporal field of view of both eyes so you are going to be having peripheral vision loss. After the optic chiasm, most of the fibers in the optic tract make synapses onto the lateral geniculibody, the LGN of the thalamus. So you can see that here in this section of the brain, you can see the optic tract, the optic chiasm. You can And follow this, and this is going to go into the lateral genicloin nucleus, the LGN. Neurons in the LGN are contacted by fibers originated from one eye and have monocular receptive fields. Layers 1, 4, and 6 are the most superior ones received from the contralateral eye, and layers 2, 3, and 5 from the ipsilateral eye. So there's a separation in the LGM depending on which layer from which eye that input came from. There are also magnocellular layers, one and two, that respond to contrast and movement, large, magno, large. And the parvocellular layers, parvo small, respond to color and form. So you have higher resolution, lower resolution areas in the LGM. Now, you also have the LGN. The thalamus has to project to the visual cortex. Now, the visual cortex, as you probably are aware, is located in the occipital lobe. So, there is a geniculo -calcarine tract which goes from the LGN to the primary visual cortex, which borders the calcarine sulcus. So there is a radiation, which are the actions that go from the LGN, and these reactions radiate in a broad sheet around the lateral ventricles. There are two main pathways for that to reach. One part of the visual field is going to be traveling through the Mayer's loop that will correspond to the superior visual field, and that goes through the temporal loop. So, one way to remember this is remember in vision everything is going to be reversed, so the major loop travels through the temporal lobe, the temporal lobe is more inferior, so of course that's going to represent the superior visual field. So, if you have damage to the temporal lobe, then you might affect the major lobe, and you have the defect that is called pie in the sky, so where the person is going to complain of loss of vision on the upper visual field, contralateral to the loss of field of view. There is also the upper optical radiation that passes under the parietal lobe, and this is called the inferior optical field, and so you have loss of the inferior optical field that might indicate that you have damage in the parietal lobe. So when you have blockage of the middle cerebral artery and its branches, it may affect the major loop or the upper optical radiation. Individual fibers carry information from only one eye, so damage here often results in deficits that are overlapping but are not identical in the two eyes. Now, in the primary visual cortex, the primary visual cortex is located in the occipital lobe, as always in the visual field, in the visual, everything is reversed, so the inferior visual fields of the inferior part of the world project to the cortex above the calcadine sulcus. and the superior visual fields project to the cortex below the sulcus. Now the macula, the fobial vision, is represented more posteriorly and peripheral fields of view are represented more anteriorly. So the blood supply to this primary visual cortex is provided mostly by the posterior cerebral artery. So, now let's look at the visual deficits that appear, and this might be a little bit complicated, but this is something that you will see a lot of questions for boards, so let's look at it. So, just a little bit of language. Hemianopia means loss of half of visual field. quadrant tenopia means a loss of a quarter of a visual field and these visual losses can be homonymous where the visual field losses are similar for both eyes they could be congruous identical or non -congruous overlapping but not exactly the same and heteronymous means that the two eyes have non -overlapping field losses. So here you have the visual fields, the retinal fields, the deglutation of the optic chiasms, and then you have the two tracks, the two paths of the geniculo-calcaline track. You have the mayor loop, or you have the other path that goes through the parietal loop. So if you have damage to the optic nerve, you have total loss of vision in one eye in this case for this example for the right eye now if you have damage to the optic carcin as we thought before now the both nasal hemiretina's vision is going to be affected and peripheral view is going to be affected but this is not symmetric because it's highly unlikely that the tumor or whatever is pressing against the carcin is perfect so you are going to have non-homonymous bitemporal hemianopia so it's loss of the peripheral view now when when and visual defects can be grossly divided if they are anterior from the optic eyes or posterior so if they are anterior from the optic chiasm are going to be by eye the def is going the the The deficit is going to affect each eye independently. Once things go posterior from the optical essence, the field is not going to be per eye, but the deficits are going to be per field of view. So you have now on the optic track a deficit. You have contralateral homonymous hemianopia. So you lose the field of the optic track is affected. You lose vision coming from both eyes. Remember that there has been an accusation, but it's going to affect the full field of view. Now, if you have now damage in the temporal lobe, in the mayor lobe, you'll have the pie in the sky disorder. So you have superior homonymous quadrant anopia, right? So the field of view, the upper part of the field of view, which is coming from both eyes, is going to be lost. Now, if the deficit is localized to the parietal log, you have inferior homonymous quadratenopia, the pie in the floor disorder. If the whole geniclocalcarine tract is affected, you have contralateral homonymous hemianopia. So you lose both the upper and the lower filopio. Now, if now, now when we go to the cortex, you have either the inferior bank of the calcarine fissure is affected, then you'll have superior left homonymous quadentinopia, and if the superior bank of the calcarine fissure is affected, then the field of view that will be affected will be the inferior. now inferior left inferior homonymous quadrantenopia if both banks of the calcarine sulcus are affected much larger then you have contralateral homonymous hemianopia now you can see that that in the in the visual cortex deficits there is some there's macular sparing, which means that the vision in the phobia, the phobial vision, the high resolution vision, tends to be preserved. So let's talk about a little bit about that macular sparing. Macular sparing, remember that the entire visual cortex is supplied by the calcane artery, which is a branch of the posterior cerebral artery. The more caudal parts of the visual cortex tend to receive also blood supply from collateral branches of the middle cerebral artery so there are two routes for blood supply for the foveal for for the foveal vision one is coming from the posterior cerebral artery but there is also from the middle cerebral artery also remember that the phobia is very important so there is an expand representation in cortex so the cortex is going to assign a very large area. Many, many cells are going to be representing that folio because it's that important. So it is unlikely that the damage or ****** is going to just block the whole thing. So that's why you have that macular sparing. And so the macular sparing is clinically important because it permits to differentiate medial cerebral artery infarctation that affects the geniculocal calcaryng tract, which there won't be no macular sparing, from posterior cerebral artery infarction, where there will be macular sparing. If there is macular sparing, it means that the cortex is being affected. Another important feature about the visual system is this condition called papilledema. So the optic nerve is part of the central nervous system embryologically. So the meningeal coverings are similar and continuous to the other areas of the central nervous system. So the sclera is the continuation of the dural sheet when it's lying inside by the arachnoid and the pia mater. The subarachnoid space is continued with the subarachnoid space around the optic nerve. So if there is elevated intracranial pressure, that elevated intracranial pressure is going to be transmitted through the optical nerve. So there's going, and it's going to be visible in the fundoscopic exam. So if there is a compression of the optic nerve, that condition is called papilidina. It's going to be characterized by the swelling of the optic disc. and so this is a non -invasive tool that might indicate elevated intracranial version using just a fundoscopy we don't need to make a spinal tap or something like that there so we have been focusing mostly on the path from the eye to the cortex but there are other additional optic tract branches there is a superior colliculus where we have head orientation eye movement, but this pad is more important in lower animals. There are also accessory optic nuclei that are important for retinal image stabilization. And also the hypothalamus, the suprachiasmatic nucleus, it's related to our circadian rhythms. So there is input, part of that circadian rhythm is determined by the time of day, which we determine by the amount of light so photic input regulates our circadian rhythm so how is visual information process in the cortex visual information is actually separated into different features so and this is done in a distributed manner so they are part of the brain that respond more to orientation they are parts of the cortex that respond to color or respond to depth or to motion so each different part is going to analyze its its information simultaneously and it is thought that this this is a much faster way to analyze all parts separately and integrate it into a final image and each column on cortex responds to a certain type of stimulus so here we have a vision a picture of the brain so here the occipital lobe where we have our primary visual cortex and there are two paths leaving the visual cortex one is the dorsal part which is called also the wear pathway which is going to be there it's going to be representing mostly location and motion And there is a ventral pathway, the watt pathway, which is going to be related to form and color. So remember that there were these magnocellular and parvocellular differences at the level of the lateral geniculate nucleus. The magno were more about movement, right? And that separation and the parvo were more about detail and color. So the parvo are more related to the Watt pathway and the Magnu are more to the Wehr pathway. So there's a separation from the LGN about these two different parts of the visual perception. So we can have different losses of visual capabilities. So if we damage the posterior brain, that's going to affect both the optic radiation or the striped cortex. visual cortex so we'll have full visual loss in some aspect of our visual field but however as we go if the damage occurs more advanced in the what and where pathway the deficits are going to be more specific which is kind of interesting so one one deficit that could appear is motion blindness so for example we have a case 43 year woman suffer bilateral infarcts of lateral parts of parietal occipital on posterior temporal lobes visual fields color vision depth perception and rhythm were unaffected however she still can cells moving sounds and feel moving on skin but she is not able to detect visual motion so that's a motion that's a dorsal stream lesion so so on the powerpoint you should be able to see a video but uh people that have motion blindness it's actually kind of dangerous for example if they want to cross the street they won't see the cars moving but they'll see a blurry image not not blurry image but it'll be like jumping images so there'll be car in one position and they'll try to cross but the car is actually moving but they don't perceive that movement so it's kind of dangerous so there's also a color blindness on prosapnoxia so this example of a man that has abrupt onset of headache and confusion one evening he doesn't lose consciousness but subsequently remember nothing that occurred during the next 12 hours he was taken home and helped to bed and when he awoke the next morning he became aware of several visual deficits so there are some visual field deficits however he lost the ability to recognize colors which is called achromatopsia and he also lost the ability to recognize faces prosopgnosis so this is not about uh this is not the where pathway this is the what pathway so this would indicate lesions in the ventral stream The posterior palatal cortex plays an important role for localization, and there are multiple association areas for multiple senses. It's a processing center. Damage to the left side is usually less frequent and transient compared to the right side damage. Right hemisphere is dominant for spatial attention. After left hemisphere damage, the right hemisphere can direct attention to both the contralateral and ipsilateral side. But after right hemisphere damage, the left hemisphere can only manage to attend to the contralateral side. So the left side of the world is neglected. So that condition is called heavy neglect. so imagine that you are seeing a 50 year patient in your office he's accompanied by his wife he had a right -sided ****** last year and is currently undergoing physical therapy to recover some of his motor control for the last now he has been able to feed himself his wife interjected during your hmp stating that for some reason his plate of food looked like this when he's done so you can see that the person is only perceiving the right side of the word and he doesn't even perceive the left side of the word so these patients uh uh you can ask them to copy and up like a clock and he's only going to draw the right side of the of the house of the claw of the flower So, this is classically associated with right posterior parietal cortex lesions. So, this is damage to the processing of the image. It's not the same as hemianopia. It's just that the subject actually is ignoring the existence of the left part of the world. Another interesting condition is blindside, where you have lesions in the primary visual cortex so the person becomes cortically blind so they cannot see they cannot consciously see however when they are asked to guess aspect of visual stimulus they are significantly better than chance so the person says no i cannot see and then can you try to uh put this letter to this lot but i cannot see well try and then they'll do it right so so they don't have a conscious perception but there are other parts of the brain that are not cortical that are taking over and permitted to do some actions however we are not conscious of that so that'll be all and thank you very much for your attention