Hello, my name is Gonzalo Tazu and today we will talk about the anatomy and physiology of the auditory system. So, today's objective is to describe the anatomy of the outer, middle and inner ear. Then we will describe the principles of mechanotransduction. Then we will review the anatomy of the auditory pathway from the inner ear to the primary auditory cortex. We'll describe the physiology of the primary auditory cortex, and we'll look at the different types of auditory dysfunction, conductive versus sensorineural hearing loss, and we'll give examples of both. So this is the ear. So the ear, we divide the ear in three parts. This is the outer ear that captures the sound pressure that's coming from outside and channels into the middle ear. So here the sound waves are traveling through air. Now in here they are going to impinge onto the tympanic membrane and now on the other side is the middle ear now these vibrations this air pressure vibration is going to convert it into vibrations through the ossicles that are going to propagate the wave, and this will be transmitted to the cochlea. Here, the sound wave is going to be traveling in liquid and will be converted into nerve impulses. The sound pressure is very, very extremely low. It's 10 to the 8th times weaker than the atmospheric pressure. So, there is a physical problem that the auditory system needs to solve, which is how to convert such small pressures into nerve impulses in a reliable manner. So, in the middle ear, we have the tympanic membrane and the othicules. So, we have here the ear canal where the sound pressures are going to make, cause vibrations in the tympanic membrane. Now, the bones of the middle ear, we have the malleus, it's the hammer, when they have the incus, and then we have the stapes. These bones are the smallest bones in the human body. So the vibration of the tympanic membrane first goes through the malleus, then that vibration is transmitted to the incus, and finally that gets transmitted through the stapes into the cochlea. And this pressure is going to be applied on the oval window. Now, these obstacles, although the wave, the sound pressure is now going to be transmitted to this solid, this cavity needs to be filled with air. So if liquid will appear here, the sound transmission will be impaired. So the problem that the air needs to solve is that the sun will live in air. and sound waves travel through air now but our bodies are mostly formed with liquid and the hair cells the the transduction of sound pressure of vibration to nerve impulses are in liquid so the airways do not ********* well into liquids you can next summer when you are at the pool go and you put your head under water you'll notice that sounds get mitigated because the sound pressure the sound will not ********* well into liquid the reason is that the liquids are much less compressible than air so in order to transmit the vibration do you need much higher pressure so you need to convert the low pressure sun wave into higher pressure such such wave can be detected in liquid so the way that this is happening is that com is by the difference in the area so you can compare here in the middle here the very large tympanic membrane and that that sound pressure is going to be applied to a much smaller area which is the area of the oval window so the forces are going to be higher and the pressure will be increased so we have a trans a conversion from low pressure in air to high pressure in liquid, performed by the middle ear. In the middle ear, we could have conductive hearing loss. So conditions that affect the middle ear conduction could be damage to the tympanic membrane, or we can have fluid in the tympanic cavity or damage to the ossicles if the tympanic membrane would be perforated then there's not going to be a pressure difference between the ear canal and the tympanic cavity so the sound will just bypass the ossicle chain and will directly in pitch on the oval window so there won't be any change in there will be no amplification in the pressure and the sound perception will be highly attenoid also if liquid accumulates inside the tympanic cavity the ossicles could not move well, their movement will be dampened and will perceive a decrease in sound intensity. So the transmission through the ossicles is not completely passive. There is a certain amount of control. There are two sets of muscles that serve to attenuate the intensity of the sound transmitted through this ossical chain. One of the muscles is the tensor tympanic muscle, which is innervated by cranial nerve number five. You can see that if you contract this muscle, the malleus will uncouple from the tympanic membrane and there will be sound attenuation. The second muscle that could mitigate the transmission of sound is the small muscle, the stapedius muscle, which is innervated by cranial nerve number 7. So this muscle, you can see when it contracts, this step is going to decouple from the oval window and it will reduce the intensity of the transmitted cell. The purpose of these muscles is to protect the very frail inner hair cells from high pressures produced by loud sounds. So, there are reflexes that when a strong sound is perceived, these muscles will contract, and the amount of energy transmitted to the hair cells will be reduced. Still, sudden loud sounds can still damage the hair cells. so now we will describe the principles of mechanotransduction in the inner ear so sound comes transmitted through the bothicles to the oval office and it travels through the cochlea and then it's transmitted into nerve impulses the cochlea is located in the petrous portion of the temporal bone it has 2.5 turns and is about the size of a chip also the diameter decreases with each coil in order to understand the structure of the cochlea let's start with this simple diagram so we have the oval window and on the other side at the output of the cochlea will have the round window so as we saw the steps couples to the oval window now between the oval window and the round window we can locate here the basilar membrane the basilar membrane is going to be the place where you're going to find the hair cells now we have the structure and now imagine that you elongate this middle um um this um middle cavity elongated and twisted and we have a cochlea so the reason that the um that we have this elongation is to have different resonant mechanical resonant frequencies of the cochlea So there's differences between the apex and the base of the cochlea. So the base is closer to where the stapes brings the vibrations into the oval window, and the apex is the more distal part. The basilar membrane is wide, thin, and floppy at the apex of the cochlea, but it is narrow, thicker, and more taut towards the bass. The bass responses to high frequencies, and the apex is going to be responding to lower frequencies. So, you might think that this as a guitar, where you have high tension, that's going to be resonating at higher frequencies, and lower tension is going to cause resonance at lower frequencies. So, the role of the cochlea is to decompose the vibration into its frequency components. As you are aware, sound is composed, can be decomposed into a sum of sine waves of different frequencies. Human hearing rate is between 20 hertz and between 16 and 20 kilohertz, depending on your age. and the stiffness of the basilar membrane determines the location of which frequency the basilar membrane is going to oscillate to. So you are converting, so you get a continuous wave and you are going to decompose it mechanically into the different frequencies, depending which part of the basilar membrane the oscillation is going to be largest. Notice also that the diameter of the cochlea is reversed to that of the basilar membrane. At the oval window, the cochlea is broadest and the basilar membrane is at its narrow, and the opposite is true at the apex. Let's look at the anatomy of the cochlea. So the air impinges onto the tympanic membrane, that vibration is transmitted through the ossicles, the force is applied on the oval window. Now we are on the couplet. So here the wave is going to travel through liquid, in this case the perilymph, this first chamber is the Scala vestibuli, the sound makes the turn, and now we are going to be into the Scala tympanic, the wave will come out through the round window. So that's the pathway of the vibration traveling to liquid. So this liquid is going to be the perilymph. So here in the middle, we have the organ of Corti, which has its tectorial membrane. And here, the liquid is not going to be perilymph, and it's going to be the endolymph, which has different properties. So, if we now cut through the cochlea, a transversal section, we can see the scala vestibuli and the scala tympanic. And here, there is the cochlear duct where the endolymph is located. So, what is important is here, surrounded by this endolymph, we have the tectorial membrane, and there is the bacillar membrane and the organ of Corti, and here, very small, you can see the hair cells, and here is where the hair cells send their output through the cochlear nerve. Now, the endolymph has high potassium concentration in the extracellular medium. So this is very unique in most of the nervous system. The concentration of potassium is low extracellularly. But here in the endolymph, surrounding the hair cell tips, the concentration of potassium is high. The perilymph, the concentration of potassium is close to what you are used to, low potassium. So this is a picture of the organ of Corti, we have the tectorial membrane, and there are two types of hair cells, they are the inner hair cells and the outer hair cells. The outer hair cells are not coupled to the tectorial membrane, and they are the actual sensory receptors. And 95% of the fibers of the auditory nerve that project to the brain arise from this population. So the outer hair cells actually make contact with the tectorial membrane, and they receive efferent terminal. so they are there's a feedback loop here where there's movement of the tectorial membrane and also the hair cells the outer hair cells are producing movement as well so the stereocilia are where the sound mechano-electrical transducers are located and are in here on the top of the inner hair cells. So there are three outer hair cells. This is an electron microscope image showing the outer hair cells and here the inner hair cells. There is one row of inner hair cells and there are three rows of outer hair cells. What is important and really something to remember is that the number of inner hair cells is very small it's only 3500 inner hair cells total so so each one comes and dead of these inner hair cells this can affect hearing and they do not regenerate and this this is a very slow a small number right so in the brain you know science we're used to millions hundreds of thousands but for ourselves the number is really small so the uh stereocilia are connected through these structures called tiplinks so these timblinks functionally coupled they are functionally coupled to mechano-electrical transduction channel so when they move the channels open and stretch of this stereocilia causes the opening of this mechanoelectric transduction channel this met channels so what hair cells actually do is to detect the flexions of the basilar membrane so the outer hair cells, the tips of the stereocilia are embedded in the tectorial membrane. So when the tectorial membrane is moved because of the vibrations in the cochlea, that movement is going to be transmitted through the inner hair cells. So that vibration is what causes the inner hair cells to move in this diagonal manner. The inner hair cells are not coupled and not directly mechanically connected to the tectorial membrane, but the movement of the stereocilia is induced by movement of this endoleaf. Now the hair cells synapse onto the spiral ganglion cells. One spiral ganglion cell connects to one inner hair cell. The hair cells depolarize when they are activated, but they do not fire action potentially as release glutamate, which is going to be affecting the spiral ganglion neurons. So the action of the spiral ganglion neurons for cranial nerve number There are also efferent axons innervating the hair cells. So, if we now look at an individual inner hair cell, surrounding the stereocilia, they are surrounded by the endolymph, and there is high potassium. When the mechanosensory trigger channels, when the hair cells, the stereocilia move, This movement causes the opening of these potassium channels, and potassium flows in, which is very unique. Remember, potassium usually flows out of the cell. In this case, in this particular case, because of the characteristic of the endolymph, the potassium flows into the cell and causes the polarization. Now, toward the cell body of the inner hair cell, that's the peri-lymph, and here, the polarization produced by potassium in the stereosellular causes inflow of calcium. This inflow of calcium is going to cause the opening of calcium-activated potassium channels, and here the potassium will flow outside of the cell to bring back the potassium down to resting. So very important is how the potassium concentration is regulated for hearing. so now let's look at the anatomy of the auditory pathway so the ascending auditory pathway starts in the cochlea in the neurons in the spiral ganglion that are going to receive input from the inner hair cells and send their axons into the ipsilateral cochlear nucleus in the rostral medulla here the actions of the cochlear the of the cochlear nucleus are going of the neurons here are going to ascend to the midpoints here is the midpoints where the fibers are going to decussate and continue their their their trip towards the thalamus so it's important to notice that some fibers are going to make synapses in the superior body complex in the midpoints some other fibers are going to so you have input from one ear so you have fibers that are going decusating here at the mean midpoints, and there are structures there that are going to have information coming from both ears. So by comparing the difference, subtle difference and intensity and timing of the input from both ears, that's going to help us for sound localization. So the circuitry for that sound localization is located here in the superior olivari complex in the midpoints. So the fibers are going to ascend through the lateral lemniscus. After the decusation in the midpoints, this information is going to reach the inferior colliculus. From the inferior colliculus, they are going to be projections to the medial genicular body the mgp of the thalamus bilaterally and this is going to be the auditory thalamus from there the thalamic neurons are going to project to the auditory cortex in the temporal lobe so besides this ascending pathway there is also olivocochlear descending pathways and there are two major subsystems the medial component is made of myelinated axons of the medial superior olive projecting to the cochlear outer hair cells and there is also a lateral component made up of unmyelinated axons of neurons of the lateral superior olive projecting to the cochlear nerve fiber near the afferent synapses with the cochlear inner hair cell so the outer hair cells are going to receive myelinated feedback fast feedback the inner hair cells that feedback signal it's slower traveling through a myelinated axis so let's now describe the basic physiology of the nucleus of the central auditory net as well as of the primary auditory cortex. So we thought that the cochlea mechanically is going to divide the different components, low frequencies and high frequencies, depending on which part of the cochlea is going to resonate. And that tonotopy is actually preserved also in the primary auditory cortex in the temporal lobe. So the more rostral part of the auditory cortex is going to represent the lower frequencies, and the more caudal part is going to represent higher frequencies. so here this is a very unique example of recordings of single cortical neurons in a human person so as you are aware there are several types of epilepsy that originate in the temporal lobe. So people, when the surgeons want to find the location of the fosce that is originating that epilepsy, sometimes they implant electrodes into the temporal lobe. Some of those electrodes are going to be in the auditory cortex. So these researchers were able to record cortical neurons in humans. And what was noticeable is they play different frequencies. And what you can see is the exquisite frequency tuning. So this neuron doesn't respond to 900 hertz, doesn't respond to 1130, but it only responds to 1110 hertz. So there's a very high precision in the human auditory cortex for frequency representations. Now we will look at the different type of conductive versus sensory neural hearing loss, and we'll provide some examples of how audition can be affected in different conditions and how the auditory function is tested by clinicians. So, hearing loss is divided generally by, it can be conductive, which will be anything that blocks the conduction of sound from the external and middle ear. This is a mechanical problem that is often correctable. And sensory neural, which involves the inner ear, cochlea, or the auditory nerve, and is usually caused by hair cell pathology. Now, in general, there's no treatment, but in recent years for this sensory neural, cochlear implants have been used in this. A cochlear implant is an array of electrodes is implanted in the cochlea, and there is an external microphone, an electronic device converts the sound captured by the microphone into divided according to the frequency, depending on the location of the cochlea, and converts that into electrical impulses. so it bypasses the middle in the middle ear and it bypasses the the transduction in the cochlear directly is going to stimulate the cochlear nerve um but several of them have been used and technology is improving increasing the density of electrodes and so on now there's also mixed loss which is a combination of sensory neural and conductive hearing loss so what are the causes of conductive hearing loss and it could be congenital atresia or malformation of the external auditory canal in this case for example in this example the external ear is properly formed but this person its ear canal is blocked. Congenitally, it's unilateral in the majority of cases and children with unilaterally or allatricially typically have normal speech as long as the other ear is unaffected. There's also the possibility that this could be also associated with malformation of the ossical but there are surgical treatments available and there's a possibility uh that in there's an increased risk of delay language development due to the functional mono-outal hearing and so early identification is essential another cause of conducting hearing loss loss would be scam cell carcinoma that blocks the ear canal here is an otoscopic image you can see here the tumor and here in a CAT scan you can see that the ear canal is completely blocked so there will be a hearing loss conductive hearing loss on the in this ear another cause of conductive hearing loss could be eustachian tube dysfunction so you have an infection which are viral upper respiratory or sinusitis the eustachian tube can get blocked so the eustachian block tube provides the drainage of the of the middle ear so without if that drainage is blocked then liquid can accumulate in the middle ear and if there is liquid accumulation the vibrations transmitted to the ossicles will be affected also the middle ear barotrauma could also cause this chamber to fill with a thorough fluid or blood which also is going to affect hearing other other causes of conductive hearing loss include osteoma malformation of the ossicles otosclerosis, benign polyps, and colosteomas, or cerumen impactation. Sensory neural loss refers to hearing loss in the cochlear and above. It could be congenital, so it can be hereditary, autosomal dominant, or recessive, like Asher syndrome, or it could be non-hereditary caused by infection, recreational drug use, alcohol, and retinoid acid. Presbycusis is the age-related hearing loss, especially high frequencies. Remember, there is only a discrete amount of inner hair cells, and as they die, as we age, we lose hearing, specifically in the high frequencies. so there is also meningitis and metals can destroy inner hair cells and cause deafness very important noise exposure it also can damage the cochlear structures also for the high frequencies a tumor most commonly this neuromus could also cause could affect the cochlear nerve and produce hearing loss. Another cause could be anorchiali malformation, where the tonsil of the cerebellum impinge on trinal nerve number eight, producing hearing loss. And also there's a very several medications, antibiotics, and chemotherapeutics, high-dose aspirin, anti-malarial agents that could also lead to hearing loss so asher syndrome is a hereditary form of hearing and vision loss the most serious type is type one so from birth there is profound deafness on both ears and vision is also affected there is decreased night vision before age 10 and vestibular function the balance is also there are also problems with it since birth the type 2 and type 3 are less severe Usher syndrome can be produced by several mutations that are going to be affecting the tip links from the stereocilia. So, there could be several genes like MY07A, USH1C, CDH23, PCHD15, and SANS. These genes create this wonderful mechanical transduction system. So, as you can see, the steam leaks are very delicate, and these genes of this molecular machinery is very unique, and there is not much redundancy. So, if you have a mutation, let's say, of cadetine 23, this typically is going to be affected, and the MET channel will not open when these stereocilia are vibrating due to the vibrations in the cochlea. So, these genes play a role in the development and maintenance of the stereocilia for Asher syndrome type 1. A second type of sensorineural hearing loss is the epilepsy, ataxia, sensorineural deafness, and tubulopathy, EAST syndrome, EAST, which is produced by mutations in KCNJ10. So this gene codes for the cure 4.1 potassium channel. As you remember, the regulation of potassium is very important for normal hearing and also for in the kidney and in the brain. So that without mutations in the KIR 4.1 potassium channel, we are going to have the epilepsy when it's affecting the brain and ataxia as well, sensory neural deafness because its role in the inner ear and the tubulopathy because of its role in the kidney. So here, for this lecture, we'll focus on what happens in the hair cell. Remember, the endolive has to have high potassium concentrations to go into the stereocilia. So cure 4.1 participates in the generation and maintenance of high potassium concentrations in the endolive. without high potassium concentrations the inner hair cells will not depolarize so this is a recessive genetic disorder you can see here that in this family pedigree it only appears at the end on these patients and there is also this hearing loss in these people So, tinnitus is most commonly described as a high-pitched continuous tone, it's caused by hyperactivity of the cochlear amplification produced by the outer hair cells, and frequently this is the first sign of a lesion that is causing hearing loss, especially sensory neural. Another cause for sensorineural healing loss is a vestibular schwannoma. This is a slow-growing tumor of the vestibular cochlear nerve. Here you can see an image of it. This is a benign tumor, but it can cause damage to surrounding structures as it grows, including the facial nerve. So remember, and then this is something to watch during your neuroanatomy lab, you should see that the cochlear nerve and the facial nerve run very close to each other. So a tumor that is growing in the vestibular cochlear nerve will also cause pressure into the facial nerve, and there will be some facial nerve-associated pathologies. So the symptoms of this vestibular schwannoma are vertigo, hearing loss, and tinnitus. It's usually diagnosed using an MRI of the brain, and the treatment is surgical. But given its location, their possibility of the complication could include hearing loss and paralysis of the facial muscles. so the ear and auditory testing could be done through otoscopic exam pure tones are played right to see in which part of the cochlea might be affected there's also a testing for speech comprehension there are tests of the middle ear to measure the timpanometry and the acoustic reflect testing we can also directly measure auditory brainstem responses this is used for example in little babies where we cannot ask them if they hear a sound however we can still measure the uh electrical evoked potential in the brainstem we can also directly measure the acoustic emission so when the the efferent copies or efferent signals cause the the basilar membrane, the membrane to vibrate, then that can be heard, and there is also the Weber and ring test. So, for the ring test, these tests are designed to determine if its hearing loss in an ear is sensorineural or if it's conductive. For the ring test, we will have a tuning fork which is placed against the mastoid bone. So, in that case, as this tuning fork is pressed through the mastoid bone, there's going to be conduction not through the ear canal but through the bone. and once the subject so the the amplitude produced by the tuning fork will will be reduced in time at some point the subject will not hear any sound anymore and at that point uh the tuning fork is moved away and close to the ear now we are not using bone conduction we are using air conduction and then because air conduction has is more efficient than um than bone conduction then the subject should report that the sound has restarted again if it does not restart this would indicate conductive hidden loss in that ear for the weather test the tuning fault is located here on the top of the head, and the subject should indicate that the, and this person has some complaint of hearing loss, it should say that the tuning fork is localized to the affected ear. So this would mean that the bone conduction is able to create vibrations in the cochlea of affected ear so the cochlea is intact and this person has conducted hearing loss however if the sound is localized to the non-affected ear then that means that there is a sensory neural hearing loss in that ear so the anatomy of the auditory system includes the ear outer middle and inner as well as diverse central nuclei of the brainstem and thalamus, and finally the neocortex. Audition emerged from mechanotransduction and synaptic transmission along the auditory pathway, and this function of mechanotransduction or synaptic transmission probably causes hidden loss. Thank you very much for your attention.