Hello, guys. How are you doing? My name is Justin Popp. I'm a third-year medical student. I'm a research scholar. I work with Dr. Rady Ramos. I've been doing research with him since January of 2023, studying neocortical development. I'm here to give you a lecture today on the anatomy and the physiology of the vestibular system. It's been a pleasure to work with him, and I'm grateful for this opportunity and his guidance to give you this lecture and to be able to work with you guys. I hope you guys had a good, restful winter break, and I hope you're ready to get started. so some objectives we have in this lecture are to describe the anatomy of the peripheral vestibular system including the otolith organs and the semicircular canals we're also going to describe the anatomy and the physiology of the hair cells in the macula and the cristi the macula are a part of the otolith organs and the cristi you'll see are related to the semicircular canals. We're also going to describe the central vestibular system anatomy and its role in postural and oculomotor control. And we're also going to describe some pathology, some clinical examples of vestibular system disorders, such as BPPV, or BPPV, benign positional proximal vertigo, along with others. So our vestibular system helps us maintain posture, balance, eye movements as we move our bodies, our heads in our environment. When we drive in cars or go on planes or ride crazy roller coasters, this vestibular system is pushed. um and we um a lot of people take it for granted how much um physiology how much action is going on just to make sure you don't fall over when you when you're walking or uh the awareness to know that like when you're driving in a car you're staying still but you're moving very fast 60 miles per hour or something, uh, through, through space. Um, so vestibular dysfunction, uh, could present with, uh, vertigo, which is a sensation of the world moving when it's not, as well as postural instability. Um, the word vertigo comes from the, uh, Latin vertir, uh, which means to turn. Um, this could be helpful to, for you to deduce what vertigo actually means. It's essentially a spinning when the world isn't spinning, right? So there's some connection of words there. Some clinical signs include nystagmus, which is a repetitive uncontrolled eye movements, as well as a positive Romberg test, where you basically have the person stand with both eyes open for a little bit. Then you test them with their eyes closed and see if they fall to either side, which can detect some sort of balance issue that they might have. And these vestibular disorders can be peripheral or central in their nature. Peripheral coming from the ear and the vestibular ganglion or structures over there or centrally as in the cerebellum. So let's just admire the anatomy to start with. You have the external ear canal, the tympanic membrane. This is the middle ear. We're not really looking at that. We're really more or less focused on what's going on in the inner ear over here. You have some important structures here located in the petrous portion of the temporal bone. You have the semicircular canals. There's three of them here with their respective ampulla at the base of the canals. You also have the utricle and the saccule here as your otolith organs. Those are involved in linear gravitational awareness, while the semicircular canals are more or less involved in angular positioning. um as you can see here um we'll go over endolymph in the hair cells but basically these electrical signals get placed onto the vestibular portion of cranial nerve 8 and that essentially hooks up to bipolar cells which are the cell bodies located in the vestibular ganglion and then those have projections to a slew of different nuclei vestibular nuclei as well as nuclei in the cerebellum, the floccular nodes, and the nodular node. So the vestibule, which is the utricle, the saccule, and the semicircular canals, they are bathed in a potassium -rich fluid known as endolymph. And this is going to be very important when we see how our action potentials are generated for signal transduction for our awareness in our environment. We also should note that the endolymph is in the membranous labyrinth, and the bony labyrinth actually surrounds this membranous labyrinth. And that bony labyrinth contains perilymph, which is high in sodium, low in potassium. It's very similar to extracellular fluid in terms of its composition. So continuing or going deeper with some of these organs here, we see the three semicircular canals. uh each um canal corresponds to a plane of the body uh we'll get into that later in this lecture and at the base of each semicircular canal is an ampulla with a cristae involved that contains hair cells and a gelatinous membrane we'll get into um that in a little bit the otolithic organs The utricle and the saccule have something called a macula, and the macula contains otoliths, which are calcium carbonate crystals on top of the gelatinous matrix, and the hair cells of the macula essentially stick up into this gelatinous membrane. And those signals get projected onto the vestibular ganglion. Notice these are bipolar neurons. See how there's axons going from the ampulla and the macula going to cell bodies, and then axons going away from this ganglion, the vestibular ganglion projecting onto the vestibular nuclei, amongst other areas. So now let's go into the otolith organs. Like I said before, the saccule and the neutral cavity is filled with endolymph, and each macula is filled with these little hair cells like I talked about earlier. So you see the otoliths on top. Now, let's pull back out, right? This in of itself is a macula. On the bottom right -hand corner picture is a macula. It's a zoom -in of a macula, and this can be in either a saccule or a utricle. So a specific macula is made up of otoliths. These otoliths are calcium carbonate crystals that essentially lay on top of this otolithic membrane, which has a very high specific gravity and is gelatinous in nature. And as you can see, you have the hair cells projecting into this gelatinous matrix. You may also notice that there's one really long cilia and a few shorter ones. The shorter ones are called stereocilia, and the tall one is called a kynosilium. And we're going to see how this gets important with the actual transmission of the signal. But essentially what happens is the movement of this gelatinous matrix moves the hair cells in a specific way, and that can either hyperpolarize or depolarize the cell, and that will either, if it's depolarized, result in action potential propagation and a firing of the signal. So, like I said before, the utricle and the saccule, they encode position and movement of the head with respect to gravity. This is a linear acceleration. So what we see here in the utricle is that the utricle, the macula of the utricle is positioned in such a way where the hair cells remain upright, while in the saccule you see the macula are in a position where the hair cells are on their side. so the saccule is specific for um let's say up and down motion like let's say you're moving not not in a front and back direction but more an up and down direction as if you're moving in an elevator these will specifically fire however if you're moving more or less in a front to back uh or if you're moving specifically in a side to side motion uh the utricle will get activated Um, as you can see, this motion moving left to right will cause the gelatinous matrix to move and that will either hyperpolarize or depolarize specific populations of hair cells. Um, let's say if you're moving, um, let's say you're driving in a car and you suddenly hit the brakes, both the utricle and the saccule will have some activation there in terms of the relative motion that was caused from you braking on your, braking your car, and that caused your head to move, and it will cause both the utricle and the saccule to essentially move and activate. and we'll get into some of this neurochemistry with potassium calcium and glutamate in a later slide so what we see here uh is some of the actual chemistry that's going on here right so let's say we have a utricle here for example it doesn't matter um what you're seeing is the kynosilium and the stereocilium they're sort of tethered by what we call tip links these tip links are essentially mechanoreceptors that can feel the motion of the gelatinous matrix moving if the motion of the gelatinous matrix is towards the kynosilium so it's essentially moving towards the longest cilia, the kynosilium, this will cause potassium from the endolymph, the surrounding fluid, to rush in via these potassium channels on the tip links. As potassium concentration increases inside the cell, this creates a potential difference. It increases um the membrane potential and this causes uh once you hit or hit the threshold right this causes potassium uh calcium to flood into the cell the calcium uh via these calcium channels here these calcium channels are open and this causes the binding of glutamate uh this causes the facilitation of glutamate into these uh vesicles And these vesicles essentially exocytose glutamate. The glutamate goes to the synaptic cleft and binds to postsynaptic receptors, causing the propagation of the action potential. We should also note that if the hair cells, the kinocillium, or if the gelatinous matrix moves this kinocillium in the direction going away from the kinocillium, as seen in the bottom right image, this will cause hyperpolarization and less frequency of action potentials to be fired. So I did mention this earlier with how these otolith organs are sensitive to gravity and linear motion. So the utricle is responsible for this side-to-side motion, detecting that saccule is more or less responsible for movement on an up-and-down plane. so a lateral horizontal movement mostly bends the utricle hairs while the hair cells in the saccule remain mostly unchanged so remember these hair cells are essentially stuck in this gelatinous matrix when this person moves himself to the right on the screen there is essentially inertia of the gelatinous matrix from the motion of the head. And this resistance to motion causes a relative force that pushes the hair cells in the opposite direction of the motion of the head. And that's due to inertia, which is a principle of physics we all know. And that's causing these hair cells to essentially go or move in the direction opposite to the head motion. Now, when you're moving front to back, you can get activation of both utricles and saccuals, and the position of the hair cells on the utricle and the saccual can also change depending on your head position. Like, let's say this person is lying down to take a nap or whatever. um you can see the possession relative position of this head is changing the way in the direction that these head cells lie so now uh going away from the otolith organs now heading towards more the semicircular canals um so basically these semicircular canals they're three ducts uh they emerge from the utricle and they're each oriented on three planes uh on the three major planes of the body. You have one going on the z-plane, which is the yaw axis. You have one going on the x-axis, which is the roll axis. And you have one going on the y-axis, which is the pitch axis. And this helps detect angular head motion along those three major planes. And there is an ampulla, which contains a cupula, inside of each semicircular canal. So to clarify, the cupula is this gelatinous matrix, or membrane, that lays on top of the hair cells, similar to the otolith organs in a way, right? And this structure, the cupula and the hair cells, are located in the ampulla of the semicircular canal, and relative motion of this cupula can either hyperpolarize or depolarize the hair cells, and that can cause an actual potential to propagate. So looking at the semicircular canals, you can sort of just logically think about what plane is involved with each of the semicircular canals and what motion it sort of produces. So if you look at the horizontal semicircular canal, that's going to be responsible for a sort of nodding your head, no, type of motion, as you can see here. Um, the posterior, the posterior semicircular canal, uh, that would be more responsible for, uh, motions nodding your head, yes. And what we see here in the anterior semicircular canal, that's going to be responsible for bending your head or bringing your ear towards your shoulder, that type of motion. Also, this is an electron microscope picture of the cubula. So let's talk about sort of what's going on here, how this actually happens. So the crosti, like we talked about, that, yeah, the crosti, which are located in the ampulla, those respond to rotary acceleration. So during a head rotation, the head rotates in one direction, yet same principle with inertia. The endolymph actually lags behind and causes a relative force on the cupula in a direction that's opposite to that of the angular head motion. So basically what's going on here is that you have head motion in one direction. The neuroepithelium, the semicircular canal, also moves in one direction, but the fluid moves slower behind it. It's almost like running with a cup of coffee in your hand. You're moving forward, but the fluid is going to spill out behind you and possibly get on your shirt. The backflow of that endolymph displaces the cupula in a direction, as seen in this image here, and that could either cause a hyperpolarization or a repolarization, which then will go on to the vestibular portion of cranial nerve gate. The endolymph doesn't cross from either side of the cupula. The cupula is sort of attached to both sides of the tissue here, of that neuroepithelium. So like we said before, those cristae respond to rotary acceleration, and that endolymph lags behind, and the endolymph essentially travels essentially in a direction opposite to that of the head turning and pushes on the hair cells in a direction that's opposite to the rotation of your head. Usually, the kynosilium is lined midline, and if the endolymph pushes the cilia towards the kynosilium, as seen on the left here, this causes depolarization and the propagation of an action potential. While on the right here, you see the opposite happens. The force is pushing in the opposite direction of the kind of cilium and causing hyperpolarization and less action potentials to be fired. So now we talked about what's going on peripherally and what's going on within those major organs, the otoliths and the semicircular canals. Now let's talk about what's going on for the pathways and where all of this stuff is going to, right? So there are a few pathways we're going to talk about here. The first one is vestibular spinal pathway. This controls corrective actions during movement and helps maintain balance and posture. So let's just follow this from the start. We see fibers from the cristae of the semicircle canals as well as fibers from the macula. Those go on to the bipolar cells of the vestibular ganglion in the internal acoustic meatus of the petrous portion of the temporal bone. And then these neurons essentially fire onto the vestibular nuclei. There are a few of them. There's superior, medial lateral inferior. And there are two vestibular spinal tracts we're particularly interested in here. You have the lateral and the medial. Let's start with the malateral. The lateral vestibular spinal tract, basically, the lateral inferior vestibular nuclei send ipsilateral projections down to the anterior horn of certain spinal levels. And this controls the contraction of forelimb and hindlimb muscles to maintain your balance in an upright posture. So let's say you got shoved or something pushed you and you had to try to catch yourself. This could be responsible for helping yourself maintain some balance. And as you can see, this red pathway essentially hits onto the anterior horn. And this goes to flexor and extensor muscles. Notice that this is ipsilateral. muscles that help with the stabilization of your head and neck. Sterinocleinomastoid is a big muscle involved in this and any damage to this pathway can cause a person to not be able to activate their sternocleinomastoid. Next pathway we have is the vestibial cerebellar pathway and this controls corrective actions during movement and also to help maintain posture. So as we can see here, you have projections from the vestibular ganglion going into some deep cerebellar nuclei like the vestigial nucleus, as well as the flocculus laterally and the nodule in the center. Also note that these are only ipsilateral projections as well. Try to keep that in mind, ipsilateral or contralateral for these pathways. Right. So another one is the vestibulothalamic pathway. So since this is going to the cortex, this is this is dealing with conscious perception of your own body and eye movement in relation to your environment. So this is conscious. Right. This is not reflexive. This is conscious. So this is something to keep in mind because it's going to a central processor, such as the somatosensory cortex in the parietal. So what we see here is you have what's not included is the vestibular ganglion sending projections to the lateral and superior nuclei at the pontomedullary junction, as seen here. And these send bilateral signals to the VPN of the thalamus, the ventral posterior nucleus of the thalamus, and then these send projections to the vestibular cortex. So next one is the vestibular oculopathway. This controls corrective eye movements to maintain posture and fixation during movement. This includes ipsilateral and contralateral projections here. So this helps explain this a little bit better. So just going over just regular eye motion without the vestibular system, what we see here is there's two types of eye motions. There can be either smooth pursuit, such as your eyes following a bird or a plane across the sky, or saccadic, your eyes jumping rapidly from one target to another. These don't necessarily involve the vestibular system. You can do this just by watching someone's extra eye muscle motion by doing like an H test, watching their pupils and their eyes track your hand. or you could just put two objects on, hold two objects in front of them and tell them to look from object to object without really moving their head and that would sort of dictate how well their saccadic eye movement is. So what you're seeing here is in coordinated conjugate lateral gaze. If you want to look to the right, what's going to happen is the abducens nerve is going to fire causing the right eye to deviate laterally while the abducens is going to fire around the medial longitudinal fasciculus, causing the opposite eye to activate its medial ******, causing a deviation of the left eye inwards, which will help it look more to the right. It's also important to note that these voluntary eye movements, it's coordinated in area 8 in the frontal cortex, seen in the top right corner here. This area 8 sends signals to the perimedian pontine reticular formation. And this helps coordinate this lateral conjugate gaze that we talked about earlier. So this is what I was mentioning before. You could test for saccadic eye movement. This isn't really involving the vestibular system as there's no motion of the head or body. So this is non-vestibular. This is just checking extular ocular eye motion. You could have, like I said, two objects, and you could tell them to look rapidly from one to one to see if saccadic eye movement's smooth, or you could move your finger slowly across their face to judge how well their smooth pursuit is. So when the body is moving or when the head is moving, this is when the vestibular system starts to get engaged. The vestibular, ipsilateral, and contralateral projections to cranial nerve nuclei that control eye movement as well as projections to the PPRF. So what that's basically saying is the vestibular nuclei is able to fire on the PPRF and when you're moving your head in whatever direction, the vestibular nucleus is able to fire on the PPRF and the PPRF is then able to act on the abducens nerve and causes your eyes to move the way they should. And the way they should is seen here. So if this patient, right, you turn their head, I guess he's turning his head to the right, if you will, what you would expect to happen is that his right eye is going to adduct towards midline, while the left eye is going to abduct so basically when you turn that head to the right the abducens nerve on the left side is getting activated to cause lateral deviation of the eye while the oculomotor nerve on the right eye is causing action of the medial ****** to cause that right eye to draw inwards. And this is all mediated by head motion, which then activates the vestibular nuclei, which activates the PPRF, which then acts upon the abducens nerve, the medial longitudinal fasciculus, and causing that to occur. However, if I did this test and I didn't see this motion of the eye and you saw this reflexive saccadic motion back to look at you to try to correct it, you would know that there is a vestibular dysfunction in that patient. So I just want to put this in here. Questions can be asked about some of these clinical presentations that we're going to go over now. If you understand the neuroanatomy and you keep the pathways in mind and you focus on the big details I try to harp on, you will increase your chances of getting these questions right. So let's start with some of these conditions. First one is BPPV, benign paroxysmal positional vertigo, and everything's in the name. So benign, it doesn't worsen over time or reflect additional pathology. Paroxysmal, it means it abates relatively quickly. The episodes usually last less than a minute. This is positional as well. It's elicited by particular head motions. And there's a vertigo. It's usually a rotary vertigo, and there's some nystagmus and nausea as well. Most cases are idiopathic, but there can be a link to head trauma or viral infection. And it's also common in people who are auto mechanics and plummer. They lay down and position their body and head in awkward positions, and maybe there is a relationship there. Um, and if you think about it, there could be, because really the pathogenesis of the disease is, uh, those calcium carbonate otoliths that lay atop of the otolithic membrane essentially gets, get, uh, get loose and fall off. They get stuck in the semicircular canals, and this sort of alters the natural motion of the endolymph as well as the Christi in those semicircular canals. so if you have a patient that presents just like such with uh vertigo dizziness um that only lasts a minute when they're only in specific positions uh you would want to work them up for bppv and how would you do that you would do that with doing what we call a ***-Hall -Pike maneuver. So essentially what happens is you tilt. The patient's head 45 degrees towards the effective side. And then you rapidly bring them supine, as seen in the image, over the top, over the table. And then you hold it there. And what you're looking for is if they're in that position, do you see in nystagmus? And if you do, that's positive, and this indicates peripheral vestibular dysfunction, possibly from those loose otoliths we talked about. The test is negative. The vertigo is more likely due to dysfunction of vestibular circuits in the central nervous system, which is a little bit more worrisome and a little bit more serious. So when the *** -Hallpike is positive, you can essentially then treat it with something called the Epley maneuver. The Epley maneuver attempts to return those oriconia to the utricle. There is a pretty good success rate in this procedure, yet there is a 50% recurrence. I doubt you guys are going to be tested on how to perform this. So here's a general method. You tilt the head 45 degrees towards the effective side you bring them supine directly over the table the first part is essentially the ***** hall pike but after you bring them supine you then rotate their head you wait 30 seconds you then rotate their head a whole 90 degrees then wait another 30 seconds rotate their whole body another 90 degrees and then you bring them upright and you hope that returns the otolith back to the utricle. And it's sort of like that little game on the bottom right, where if you tilt the table a certain way, you can get the balls to go into the hole that they're supposed to. It's kind of like a little game like that. So next disease is Meniere's disease. This is a cause of peripheral vertigo. An important note we see here is that usually peripheral vertigo is more severe in terms of its intensity than a central vertigo. Meniere's disease is caused by improper endolymph resorption in the vestibule. Remember how those vestibular organs are covered in endolymph, which is that potassium-rich fluid. So this is just improper resorption of that fluid. This can be idiopathic, but it can be viral in nature. There's something, there's autoimmunity involved, genetics, or the environment could also be involved. The symptoms of this include recurrent episodes of peripheral vertigo, as well as fluctuating unilateral sensorineural hearing loss, as well as a unilateral tendinous. This is the Meniere triad. um these are some things you should be focusing on in your questions how the patient actually presents you're going to get a lot of information off the history and your physical exam on these types of questions that could help hone you into the right answer treatment includes antihistamine benzos and antibiotics the next disease we have here is labyrinthitis it's caused by inflammation of the membranous labyrinth which contains your endolymph of the inner ear. The etiology is a bacterial or viral infection. So this is an infection leading to inflammation. And it could also be caused by a systemic autoimmune disease as well as HIV. It can cause a severe vertigo, nausea, vomiting, tinnitus, and or hearing loss. uh the patient usually makes a full recovery but some are left with residual balance or hearing issues um so it this can sound a lot like meniere's but um one thing i guess i can say to you guys is that labyrinthitis is labyrinthitis is an infection of the middle ear of the of the inner ear i'm sorry but meniere's is not necessarily an infection but it can be caused by an infection. While Meniere's is more likely to present with multiple recurrent episodes of vertigo, well, that's more unlikely in labyrinthitis. Another issue we have, we could have here is vertebral basilar insufficiency. So as you see in this diagram, the two vertebral arteries essentially cross the C6 transverse foramen, and they join up to form the basilar artery. And this is caused by inadequate blood flow through the posterior circulation. The medulla, the cerebellum, the pons, the midbrain, the thalamus, the occipital cortex can all be affected in this case. It may occur as a TIA, a transient ischemic attack, usually caused by arthrosclerosis of the vertebral arteries or basilar artery. It can also be caused by a traveling embolism as well. Risk factors include hypertension, smoking, older age male, positive history for vertebrobasilar insufficiency in the past, obesity, diabetes, and hyperlipidemia. Symptoms include a central vertigo, syncope, nausea, visual or auditory disturbances, dysphagia, or hemiparesis. so this is not really something you should memorize yet but um not that you have to memorize it but it's really good to like because you're going to be doctors you're going to be ascribing all different types of medicines and really knowing the side effect profile is really beneficial for your patients as you could warn them about them or you could maybe decide not to use them due to certain side effects, right? So these list of drugs are known to be autotoxic. Aminoglycosides, furosemide, splatin, quinine, salicylates, erythromycin, vanco, and opioids, these can all be autotoxic. So another insult to our vestibular system can come from a posterior circulation ******. Posterior circulation strokes occur, they count for about 1 out of 5, 20% of all strokes. Most of them are ischemic in nature, caused by an arthrosclerosis, an embolism, or even a dissection. These posterior circulation strokes, this is simply an order at which they occur. So they most commonly occur in the posterior cerebral, then after that, the posterior inferior cerebellar, then the superior cerebellar artery, and then the anterior inferior cerebellar artery is the least common. But the patient can present with central vertigo from vestibular nucleon involvement at the pontomedullary junction. There could be ataxia from cerebellar involvement, nystagmus vomiting, as well as headaches and motor weakness. Another syndrome we're going to talk about here now is Wallenberg lateral medullary syndrome. It can cause a central vertigo and it's caused by an occlusion of the posterior inferior cerebellar artery. So there are a lot of nuclei in this area to be aware of um you have the vestibular nuclei here at the pontomedullary junction uh that is supplied and these nuclei are supplied by the pca in part which is why if there is an occlusion of it these nuclei aren't going to get perfused they're it's going to get infarcted essentially from the occluded pca and in this case since the vestibular nucleus can be damaged you can get a vertigo and nystagmus that occurs beats in the direction of the gaze. There could be ataxia or dysmetria from the inferior cerebellar peduncle insult. And remember that the inferior cerebellar peduncle carries the signals from the bipolar cells of the vestibular ganglion to the cerebellum and the brainstem. There could also be dysphagia, hoarseness, and dysphonia from nucleus ambiguous insult as well. And there could even be a Horner syndrome and hiccups from insulting sympathetic fibers in the area as well. You're also going to get a contralateral loss of pain and temperature in the trunks and the limb. You remember your spinal thalamic tract crosses in the spinal cord, with the anterior white commissure, I believe it is. So that decusation happens there, which is why this is contralateral in nature. And you could also get a same side reduced pain and temperate sensation of the face. Now, we're going into some tumors that could occur, specifically posterior fossa tumors posterior fossa is an area of the skull that's basically located between the brainstem and the cerebellum um so a common uh tumor type you should know about is that a cran occur in this area is a vestibular schwannoma uh these are benign tumors that arise from the schwann cells of the cranial nerve 8. So Schwann cells are basically myelin -producing cells of the peripheral nervous system, and it's a tumor of those Schwann cells. The similar schwannomas can also involve the 7th cranial nerve as well. So you could see a concurrent Bell's palsy along with having the schwannoma. So cranial nerve 7 leads to the stylo mastoid foramen, And cranial nerve 8 and 7, they run very close together. So vestibular schwannoma can also cause cranial nerve 7 issues. Another type of tumor we see here is the posterior fossa meningioma. These arise from the dural layer of the meningial layer. And in the case here, what we see is a right inferior tentorial meningioma. So this, what we see here, this is the tentorium cerebelli, this sort of triangular-shaped piece of durable connective tissue that separates the cerebellum and the cerebrum, and the tumor is essentially growing off of that meningeal layer. And it's projecting downward into the cerebellum, and this compression can cause, and this growth of this tumor can cause compression of the vestibular nuclei, the follicle nodular lobe, the cerebellum, and other vestibular pathways. So another insult that could occur to the vestibular system is multiple sclerosis. Multiple sclerosis is an autoimmune disease. Basically, it's an autoimmune disease against oligodendrocytes, myelin-producing cells of the central nervous system. As you can imagine, if you damage your myelin, this demyelination of the cerebellar and the vestibular neurons and their axons can cause some type of vestibular dysfunctions. So here's a little chart for you guys to go over, just separating central and peripheral vertigo clinically. So here are some of the points of emphasis that we had throughout the lecture. We talked about vestibular end-organ anatomy, sphysiology, the type of vestibular nuclei, some of the pathways, as well as pathologies we went on. I thought I would include a question for you guys. I didn't find this from anywhere. I actually just thought of this just before I recorded this lecture. So this isn't from anyone. This is from me. I tried to make it somewhat board style and somewhat comp related, something that you might see on your tests. So I gave it my best go. And I think it's a pretty medium level question and we'll go over it, right? So a 45-year-old male presents with dizziness for the past month. The patient also feels he has a loss of coordination of limb movements on the right side of his body and feels that he wants to fall to his right side. The patient also finished a course of aminoglycosides to treat a pseudomonas aeruginosa infection. The patient also complains of loss of pain at temperature on the right side of his face as well as the left side of his body. On exam, the patient has a horizontal nystagmus that beats when the patient looks to the left and the right. What is the most likely diagnosis? I'll give you a few seconds to think about it. um you can pause the video if you would like and uh the answer's on the next slide so try not to look now so the answer in this case is uh wallenberg syndrome i can go over quickly why um this isn't bpvv i didn't tell you anything about the episodes of dizziness being well i didn't really tell you anything about um the quality of the dizziness where did the episodes come on and off um did they last for a minute were they position i didn't even really give you that information so you could rule that out right um mca ****** uh i kind of put that in there as like a random thing um you're not going to see these types of dysfunctions with an mca ****** If you have an MCA ****** on the right, on the left, I'm sorry, on a right-handed person, you can get like a Broca's aphasia, but not really related to this picture. A drug-induced ototoxicity, that's wrong because usually you may get more sensual neural hearing loss. I really didn't tell you this guy had hearing loss, right? um this isn't meniere's the episode there's really no uh they're not episodic um i didn't really tell you anything about the nature of it um you could also look at the physical exam findings to help rule out that and the same thing with labyrinthitis there there isn't really um an infection yes he had a previous infection but that patient was treated for it uh and And there's really no ear pain. There's really no ear pain, and I didn't give you any physical exam showing some type of finding of inflammation in the inner ear. So you try to rule out some of these options, as well as the physical exam findings. It could help you figure out that the answer would be C. I hope that was a good explanation. so that's all i have for you guys uh it's been a pleasure working with you guys i really hope that this lecture was useful and formative um feedback is everything um i uh teaching is something that i would like to get better at a little bit each day um so because it would help me to help you guys better and to help you guys to learn what you need to learn and to help you guys become successful doctors in the future. I wish all of you the best of luck and have a great day.