Welcome students to the Pharmacology of Cholinomimetics. There are two lectures because of two different types of cholinomimetics and this one we will start with is the direct acting group. Direct acting muscarinic and direct acting nicotinic receptor agonists, Dr. Goldstein speaking. Please contact me if you'd like to chat about pharmacology. individuals and groups are most welcome. Here are learning objectives. I've put titles on each of these learning objectives to help you focus on what they're about. As you can see, pharmacokinetics and mechanisms, mechanisms, mechanisms. The school requires the Scholar Rx Bricks. I require the practice questions, All else is completely optional. Learn however you like to learn. I'm providing this lecture video, word handout, guided reading questions to help you focus on what it is you need to know. And you can look at what is nice to know if you wish. here are links i've indicated the the review books that have practice questions in them if you like to use those we'll talk about the autonomic nervous system first it's impossible to really understand the pharmacology of cholinomimetics and pathomimetics and the receptor blockers without understanding the functions of the autonomic nervous system. Touch one place and the entire nerve web is affected. Just as if you were to touch one spot on this lovely spider web, the entire web would shake. I'm providing key points, you may use them or not, depending on if it helps you. It is really the need to know information. What is it I need to know? It's in the key points. Let's start though with some tips for studying the pharmacology of the autonomic nervous system. Students always ask me, how do I learn pharmacology? and you'll do it however works for you, my suggestion is always to start with the big picture. Excuse me. I'm going to use my arrow to point. The big picture. Why are they used? How will they achieve the desired therapeutic outcomes? This goes back to the mechanisms of action. And what is the common thread that connects all of them? Begin with the class actions. That's always my suggestion. Class actions. Get the big picture first. All of the drugs are going to reflect the class actions. So if you learn that, it's pretty much the same for all the drugs in the group. Now there will be some drug-specific effects, generally one or two, usually on the pharmacokinetics, and if you've already learned the class actions, it's so much easier to learn those one or two differences for the drugs that I have put stars on that you need to know by name. definitions are so important for understanding anything at all to to be comfortable with the language that's being used in this case the language of medicine the language of science the language of pharmacology will help you to understand and help you to communicate with others, put titles on these key points also to help you recognize right away what is in the content of the slide. So we started out with the neurotransmitter acetylcholine. Now we're moving to the receptors and the actions of the drugs because the drugs are going to behave like acetylcholine. They are cholinomimetics. They will mimic the neurotransmitter actions. And then some properties of the drugs, uses and adverse effects. And that brings us to the actual beginning of the lecture. The indirect cholinomimetics, as I mentioned in the beginning, will be described in the next lecture, and the remaining autonomic nervous system groups of drugs will be in later lectures. So let's take a quick look at the autonomic nervous system functions. This is the kind of big picture view. On On the left-hand side of this figure, here, is the sympathetic division, and on the right -hand side is the parasympathetic division. Acetylcholine is the neurotransmitter for all cholinergic neurons, and the parasympathetic division uses acetylcholine for its neurotransmitter. But that's not all. The acetylcholine is a neurotransmitter at the ganglia, at the nicotinic receptors. And there's two exceptions. It's a neurotransmitter in the sympathetic nervous system at the adrenal medulla and in the sweat glands. Now, the enteric nervous system is regulated by the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous system. It is the parasympathetic side that predominates. That said, the enteric nervous system really is called a second brain. It's self-contained. It works on its own. It has many, many, many neurons in there with different neurotransmitters. And as I said, it is the autonomic nervous system that regulates the function. Looking now at where these nerves emerge from the spinal column, looking first at the parasympathetic nervous system, they come out of here, this portion right here, and out of the sacral portion right here. The sympathetic nervous system comes out of the thoracic portion down to the second lumbar vertebra. The parasympathetic has long pre-ganglionic neurons and short post-synaptic neurons which join at the effector organs. Now, the sympathetic has short preganglionic neurons. I see ganglia here, ganglia here, these circles, and long postganglionic neurons. And all of these organs are innovated by both systems. Now a really, really simplified version so I can talk about the receptors. The somatic system, so this is our motor neuron here, and this is our skeletal muscle figure here. Here is acetylcholine, so that's a neurotransmitter, and it's nicotinic receptors here at the neuromuscular junction, so nicotinic receptors. Parasympathetic come out of the cranial and spinal, sacral especially. Synapse, so we have this long presynaptic neuron, synapse at the ganglia, and this is synapses at all the ganglia. See down here too. Then this short postsynaptic neuron with acetylcholine, neurotransmitter, and the neuron will synapse with the effector organs. So the effector organs in the parasympathetic nervous system are smooth muscle, so we have smooth muscle all over, cardiac tissue, and secretory glands, glands that secrete, and we'll be talking about the various substances that get secreted. There is an exception, and that is the sweat glands are cholinergic, but they are on the sympathetic nervous system. So here we have the sympathetic. We have the neuron going to the adrenal medulla, but it is a nicotinic type, and this is NN, that means neuronal. This is NM, that means neuromuscular. here we have the ganglia, which again is the acetylcholine, so it's a cholinergic neuron going to the ganglia, neuronal nicotinic receptor there, and these long postsynaptic neurons going to the effector organs. And norepinephrine is the neurotransmitter at the effector organs acting on alpha and beta receptors. Acetylcholine to the sweat gland, which is muscarinic. The receptors of the parasympathetic system, the cholinergic receptors of the parasympathetic system, are muscarinic receptors, M. Whereas, as I mentioned, at the adrenergic side, which is the sympathetic side, are alpha and beta receptors. And it is a muscarinic receptor at the sweat glands. I put a picture here of the adrenal glands. Adrenal, they sit on the kidneys. And there are various things secreted from there. But we're talking about epinephrine and norepinephrine, which are secreted from the adrenal medulla chromophane cells into the bloodstream, and then they travel to the effector organs through the bloodstream. Let's take a closer look at the receptors. This is really a kind of a generic look at receptors. we're going to be talking about ion channels. This is the spot where the ligand will bind. The ligand-gated ion channel would likely be on two sides. The channel opens and ions pass through. This is a G-protein coupled receptor. You can see seven passes through the membrane. And we have our G protein down here with its components, alpha, beta, and gamma components. These G proteins are connected to ion channels. So these are G protein connected ion channels, which when activated will open. the agonist binds activates the alpha and beta gamma components separate and then the second messengers are activated and on and on that's a basic idea so let's start talking now about the cholinomimetics, but first we need to understand acetylcholine. You can see it's a very simple molecule and it's got a quaternary ammonium group on it. Quaternary 1, 2, 3, 4 bonds and a positive charge. It is synthesized within the presynaptic neuron. Choline will pass through the choline transporter. Acetyl-CoA will donate an acetyl group to the choline making acetylcholine. It will then be stored in the vesicle. It gets into the vesicle by this vesicle -associated transporter. And it will stay stored inside the vesicle along with other neurotransmitters, whatever is necessary for that particular neuron. And when an action potential comes down, it will cause opening of the calcium channel here on the presynaptic neuron, plasma membrane. Calcium will go in, the vesicle will move to the membrane, and this is actually already showing you here where it's invaginated. So just imagine this is the vesicle has moved down here, and the membrane has opened, and the contents are exocytosed into the synapse. These receptors here, which happen to be in a green color, and here on the presynaptic neurons, so postsynaptic, presynaptic, will then be activated by acetylcholine. And as acetylcholine diffuses that, it will activate the presynaptic neurons. The artist placed them here on the membrane, but that doesn't mean they're necessarily way out there. They could be much closer in. And there aren't going to be just one or two or three or four. There are many, many, many receptors that are expressed on the plasma membranes. So we get our postsynaptic action and our presynaptic effects. This receptor that is colored in blue is labeled as other receptors. So there are not only muscarinic receptors, and these are obviously G proteins here, but there are other types of receptors that are also expressed on the neurons. This figure here on the postsynaptic membrane, that looks to me anyway like a vase with flowers in it, is labeled as acetylcholine esterase. It is this enzyme that will inactivate acetylcholine. It has an extremely fast action. Acetylcholine will bind to the enzyme, and the enzyme will hydrolyze it into choline, which will then be recycled back to be formed again into acetylcholine, and acetate, which will then move out of just a few of the way. So that's basically a very simple process that the acetylcholine synthesis, storage, exocytosis, action, and inactivation by acetylcholinesterase. Let's take a closer look now at these receptors that we're talking about, the specific types, the nicotinic and the muscarinic. On the left-hand side is the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor. It's an ion channel, and it is ligand -gated, meaning that a molecule needs to bind to it in order to cause it to open. this is a cutaway here of the channel it says alpha beta delta alpha so that would be a typical nicotinic receptor at our skeletal muscle there are other configurations of nicotinic receptors but the idea is still the same acetylcholine will bind and cause it to open and cations especially sodium will move through this one says neuronal this one says neuronal they have different configurations but they're still functionally the same what i want to point out is that the acetylcholine receptor, I mean, well, yes, I guess you could call it a receptor, where acetylcholine will bind is at the alpha subunit, see, they're both alpha, interface with the neighboring subunit. Same thing here, alpha neighbor. Same thing here, these are all alphas. So they're all around. Acetylcholine needs to bind to two, in this case, in the neuromuscular and this neuronal, to both sites in order to cause opening of the channel. Now, looking at the G protein, it's an interesting figure, the way the artist has shown it, how the configuration of it in the plasma membrane. Here we have the amino side on the outside and the carboxyl side on the inside. this indicates where the g protein will actually join up and attach to the g protein which is why it's called to the receptor which is called why it's called the g protein coupled receptor now these are called metabotropic and that is because they are also connected to the ion channel the muscarinic receptors come in three types m1 2 3 4 and 5 the odd numbered ones m1 m3 m5 are all of the gq variety of protein coupled receptors which means they activate phospholipase C, which then forms inositol trisphosphate and diacylglycerol. Inositol trisphosphate increases intracellular calcium levels, which then goes on to cause effects, and diacylglycerol increases phosphokinase C, respectively. So an M2 and M4, the even-numbered ones, are the inhibitory type of G-protein-coupled receptors. So they inhibit adenylacyclase, which decreases concentrations of cyclic AMP, the second messenger, which will, in turn, increase potassium conductance and decrease calcium conductance through their connection to the ion channels. Okay, so that's all good. The neurotransmitter will activate the receptors, and then what happens? These receptors are located really everywhere in the body. So think about how, think about the relevance using drugs now. Drugs are going to mimic the actions of acetylcholine, which means they're going to have widespread effects because they'll affect the muscarinic receptors all over the body or the nicotinic, depending on what it is we're talking about. It is indicated in this figure right here. The top line says red sympathetic actions and the second line says blue parasympathetic actions. So let's just look at the blue ones. Eye, contraction of the iris sphincter muscle, so the pupil will contract. That means it gets really small. And contraction of the ciliary muscle. Now the lens will change shape to accommodate for near vision. So we can see up close. Looking at the trachea, the lungs, right here in the picture. the parasympathetic system causes constriction of the bronchi so closes the bronchial smooth constricts the bronchial smooth muscle causing the bronchi to be closed not closed definitely but a smaller diameter and increasing the secretions so the mucus will be secreted so we have the constriction and we have increased like juicy stuff in the bronchi. Adrenal medulla No. Kidney? No. So now we're down here to the urinary tract. The acetylcholine causes the bladder to get rid of the contents. In other words, to promote micturition, to allow urination. So how's it going to do that? Well, imagine the bladder is kind of like a balloon with water in it. If you squeeze it, the water will go out. So contraction of the detrusor, which is a muscle around the bladder, contraction of it is causing that squeezing effect. And relaxation of the trigonin sphincter so that the fluid inside can be released out. So micturition, the ability to urinate. In the male genitalia, it causes stimulation of ********. In the eyes, back to the eyes, I should have gone back and forth, but I went down and up. The lacrimal glands, so tearing. Salivary glands, watery secretions, lots of watery secretions. the heart it causes the heart to slow down it decreases the heart rate it decreases the strength of contraction it isn't listed here but it decreases the slows down the conduction through the atrioventricular node. In the GI system, it increases the muscle motility and tone, and also it can regulate the secretions. Female genitalia, no. Blood vessels in the skeletal muscle. That's going to be a sympathetic effect, so no. And blood vessels in the skin, mucous membranes, and splanchnic area, all of those are controlled by the sympathetic nervous system. And I just want to put a little corollary on here that I'll talk about later. Okay, so the sympathetic nervous system now will do basically the opposite pretty much of what the parasympathetic nervous system is doing. In terms of drug therapy, well, the drugs don't know from sympathetic or parasympathetic. Their action is related to the affinity of whatever receptors they're intended to act on. So if we give a cholinomimetic, a direct acting cholinomimetic, that means they act directly on the receptors, and it's acting directly on muscarinic receptors, it's also going to activate sweat glands. Even though that's a sympathetic side, it's a muscarinic receptor, the M3 type. There are also non -neuronal receptors and non-neuronal synthesis of acetylcholine, such as in immune cells, and that's just a little piece of information to keep under your hat. I'm not going to be dwelling on that much, but the immune system can also be regulated by the neurotransmitters of the autonomic nervous system. Eye. I'm going to spend a couple of minutes on the eye. On the left-hand side, this is the orb. You can see the orb. This is the anterior portion. Here's the lens. Here's the iris. this is mainly showing you the blood supply and lots of vasculature in the eye and that's important because we're sending our drugs through the bloodstream and they are going to reach their targets through the bloodstream. Now let's take a closer look because we need to be looking at the receptors in the eye. So this is a cutaway. Here's the cornea. This would be the cornea on this larger picture. This is a little hole here that's called the canal of Schlem. That would be the canal of Schlem drains into the venous system and it's located on the inner portion of the eye. It's a trabecular meshwork. You can see it looks like this mesh. The aqueous humer will drain through this mesh and into the canal of Schlem, which will then take it into the venous system. Now here's the iris. This is a rendition of the iris and the sphincter muscle, the iris sphincter muscle, that's going to cause it to contract and make a pinpoint, a small pupil. It has a muscarinic receptor on it. It's an M3 receptor. The dilator muscle, which would cause the pupil to open. Now that's an alpha receptor. That's on the sympathetic side. So we see the iris is regulated by both the parasympathetic and the sympathetic side. Looking at the ciliary body. Here we have the ciliary body up here, but at least the vessels of it. ciliary epithelium ciliary muscle smooth muscle the smooth muscle is innervated by the parasympathetic system and muscarinic receptors the epithelium by the sympathetic system and beta receptors so we will be talking about the effects of the cholinomimetics of the sympasomimetics of the blockers on all of these various organs including the eye. The signaling in the heart is really important for you to understand because it's part of the reflex system controlled by baroreceptors. So if you understand it you'll be able to understand the reflex reflex responses. Here we have the heart, a plasma membrane in heart tissue. This is the sinoatrial node, so that's a pacemaker. Here we have a muscarinic receptor and it's labeled M2. Acetylcholine activates the M2 receptor at the sinoatrial node. M2, remember, is inhibitory and that will cause slowing of the heart rate. It is the sympathetic side that is the predominant effect in the heart. slowing of the heart rate and also it will slow conduction through the AV node the same action slow the heart rate, slow conduction through the AV node and reduce the force of contraction that's not shown here now looking at the motor neuron here in panel B activation of the nicotinic receptor there in the motor neuron if strong enough will activate an action potential it's called an end plate potential and we have that indicated here and that will cause contraction of the skeletal muscle and And now, here is the vasculature. This is an interesting idea. Acetylcholine receptors are located on endothelial cells in some areas of the vasculature. This is not innervated by the parasympathetic nervous system. This is one of those non-neuronal acetylcholine receptors. activation of the receptor it's an m3 receptor will cause the synthesis of nitric oxide nitric oxide is a powerful vasodilator so nitric oxide that's been synthesized in the endothelial cells will passively diffuse to the smooth muscle of the vessel and that will cause vasodilation That's the takeaway from all of this. You don't have to remember all of the rest of it. That's what I, this is the part to remember. Acetylcholine non -neuronal receptor M3 on endothelial cells causes synthesis of nitric oxide, activation of nitric oxide synthase, which will then passively diffuse into the smooth muscle of the vasculature causing vasodilation. Now, if we were to inject a dose of acetylcholine intravenously, which we do not in clinical medicine, that would actually cause this effect that I just described. We don't give these drugs IV. We don't give choline -omimetics IV. So we don't tend to see this effect with the drugs. Now, I mentioned before reflux responses and local integration. Here's our neuron again. Here's our postsynaptic neuron. So local integration. Feedback by modulatory autoreceptors, heteroreceptors on the presynaptic nerve. nerve. So I draw your attention to this area here that I'm circling. The autoreceptor means that it is the type of receptor of that neuron. It's a self-receptor. So this would be an M2 receptor in the periphery. Activation of this presynaptic M2 receptor, which remember is inhibitory is going to inhibit the release of the neurotransmitter. If this muscarinic receptor were located, let's say over here, on a neighboring sympathetic neuron, it's still an M2 receptor, but it's on a different system. It's on the sympathetic system, so it becomes a heteroreceptor. It's the same muscarinic, M2 receptor, activation of it by acetylcholine going over to the neighbor will reduce the exocytosis of that neurotransmitter. Let's say norepinephrine. We see a heteroreceptor here. It's the same concept. Let's say that this is an alpha-2 adrenergic receptor. adrenergic, meaning it's a sympathetic nervous system. Now, if this neighboring neuron right here that you can't see that I'm just indicating here with this red pointer is a sympathetic neuron and the action potential causes exo-diastosis of the neurotransmitter norepinephrine and norepinephrine come manages to diffuse over to the neighbor here to the heteroreceptor alpha 2 it's still going to be the same action that alpha 2 is on the sympathetic side but it is going to reduce the the exocytosis of acetylcholine so hetero just means different auto means same hetero means different. Systemic reflexes, homeostatic mechanisms that regulate blood pressure, gastrointestinal motility, bladder tone, airway, smooth muscle, and other processes. Remember I said before that the sympathetic nervous, the parasympathetic does all of these various things. It causes secretions, it causes smooth muscle contraction. the sympathetic nervous system tends to do the opposite so it would cause vasoconstriction relaxation of smooth muscle in the bronchi and we'll go into more detail in that when we get there to the sympathetic nervous system but the point is they have opposite effects they regulate each other. Now, let's say that there is a drop in blood pressure that's detected by the baroreceptors in the carotid arteries and the aortic arch. That will send a signal to the sympathetic nervous system in the CNS to increase heart rate and the force of contraction in response to this drop in blood pressure. So that would be a reflex. On the other side, if there is an abrupt increase in blood pressure due to vasoconstriction, the same idea happens. The CNS will now send a message to the parasympathetic system, which will travel down the vagus nerve, activate the M2 receptors, and cause the heart rate to slow down, conduction through the AV node to slow down, the force of contraction to be reduced, which will reduce the amount of blood cardiac output being put into the vessels. So that will help to reduce the blood pressure. So that's a reflex response. Please remember the nervous system is interconnected, it's intricate, and it ensures that the body maintains homeostasis and appropriate responses to various stimuli. That's the whole point. So let's check the check your knowledge. What is the definition of cholinergic receptors? What are the cholinergic receptor subtypes. Where are they located? So what's the definition? Acetylcholine is the neurotransmitter for nicotinic and muscarinic receptors. Nicotinic receptors are ligand-gated ionotropic receptors. Sodium, potassium, and sometimes calcium moves through them. Muscarinic receptors M1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 are G -protein-coupled receptors located on effector cells M1, 3, and 5 are postsynaptic GQ-type PCRs and M2 and 4 are actually the presynaptic inhibitory type auto - and heteroreceptors. Where in the body are they located? Nicotinic receptors in the periphery are located at all ANS ganglia, the adrenal medulla. Muscarinic receptors are distributed really basically lots of places, heart, blood vessel, certain blood vessels, bronchi, GI tract, urinary tract, salivary, lacrimal, mucus, and sweat glands. Nicotinic and all types of muscarinic receptors are distributed across various regions of the CNS and non-neuronal cells, such as immune cells and endothelial cells. So let us get down to the actual pharmacology. Direct acting and indirect acting. So let's talk about the direct acting in this lecture. We'll be talking about actions directly on muscarinic receptors, actions directly on nicotinic receptors. Muscarinic receptors get their name from this mushroom, which contains muscarine, and it will bind all types of muscarinic receptors, but no other types. the this is pilocarpus plant and this is where pilocarpine comes from which is the prototype of the choline omimetics so choline esters are acetylcholine we saw that Methacholine, carbachol, and bifenicol. And the tertiary amines are pylocarpine, the prototype, and sevimeline, which is the synthetic tertiary amine. I have stars on all of them. It's only six drugs. If you think about them by their groups, it's really only two groups, but they do basically the same things. the structure activity relationship matters with these drugs it's very easy to see why they act the way they do so the quaternary part we see that here they all have that part and that's going to be an important structural feature when when we get to the mechanism Then they have various changes within the structure. Here's this simple acetylcholine. Methycholine just merely is a methyl group attached here at the beta point. Carbacol just has this difference right here. This is a carboxyl group. This one has a nitrogen in it, so it's a carbamyl group. And bethenacol has both. B for both. And methylcholine because it's got a methyl group. Methanichol B for both. And carbachol is just the carbamol. So maybe that'll help you remember them. Now the tertiary amines have only three bonds here at the nitrogen. One, two, three. That's why they're tertiary. Pylocarpine and sevimeline. Okay, so how does this change anything? Well, acetylcholine, as we know, is going to bind to nicotinic receptors and muscarinic receptors, and it's going to be degraded by acetylcholine, esterase. Methacholine, that's here, is more resistant to cholinesterase hydrolysis, so it has a little bit longer duration, quite a longer duration. It doesn't have very much nicotinic activity actually, but it's the only difference in the structure compared to acetylcholine. Now here's carbacol down here and bethenicol. Both have this mammal group and that will make them even more resistant to cholinesterase hydrolysis. The carbacol, which does not have this methyl group, has very strong nicotinic activity as well as muscarinic. Bethanacol has really only muscarinic activity. And, as I said, this cholinesterase resistance to hydrolysis. Pylocarpine is not metabolized by cholinesterase. It's metabolized in the liver, and it has virtually no nicotinic activity like muscarine. So those are the features, structural features, to remember as we go along and talk about these drugs. Cholineesters are hydrophilic. We could see that with the quaternary ammonium. Therefore, they're not well absorbed from the GI tract. They do not cross into the CNS. They are rapidly eliminated in the kidney. They're water-soluble. Only bethenagol is oral, and a big dose has to be used in order to get enough of it through the GI tract, through the kidney, through the liver, and into the systemic circulation. Tertiary amine, pilocarbine is well-absorbed. It's not a hydrophilic compound like the others. It does cross the blood-brain barrier. So it's going to have CNS effects, and hepatic metabolism, as well as some esterases in various tissues. It is excreted in the urine. Sevumeline, it was designed actually to have more limited CNS ***********. It is well absorbed and metabolized in the liver, excreted in the urine. Pretty typical pharmacokinetics of drugs. Okay. Muscarinic agonists on M3. Now these are not selective for M3, but the therapeutic uses are aimed at M3. Acetylcholine we don't really use clinically very much because the half-life is like next to zero. So it can be used in the eye, and it's used in ophthalmic surgery. So Why can we use it in the eye? Well, there's much less acetylcholinesterase in the eye than there is in synapses. So the acetylcholine effect lasts a bit longer. Methycholine, inhalation only. So think now for a second. Well, cholinomimetics are going to cause bronchoconstriction just like acetylcholine does. So why in the world would we like to induce bronchoconstriction? it makes it hard to breathe. Well, that's the point, actually. It's called a bronchoprovocation diagnostic challenge test, and it's given in the event that, as a diagnostic for asthma, and patients suspected of having asthma. If they have outright asthma, there's no need to give this bronchoprovocation test. So patients who do have underlying asthma are going to be much more responsive to this bronchoconstricting effect than other people. And in fact, the literature says that it may actually be the only evidence of airway dysfunction in that individual with asthma at that point. It lasts for 30 to 45 minutes. Well, that's a long time to have the bronchoconstriction on board. So a reversal agent is available. This is the sympathetic side now. A beta-2 adrenergic agonist is going to act on bronchial smooth muscle and cause relaxation. Open up those bronchi again carbacol topical eye drops we don't give it systemically because it's got it would have so many side effects because of its actions on both the muscarinic and the nicotinic receptors so it's just used to lower intraocular pressure such as for glaucoma or an ophthalmic surgery for meiosis. Bafenacol, I mentioned before, is the only one that's oral. It can be used for urinary retention due to neurogenic bladder. It has variable effectiveness. Let's put it that way. Sometimes for some patients it might be somewhat effective, for other patients not and it has been used for acute post -op and postpartum urinary retention there may be times when it is still used but there are other approaches other strategies for managing that now pilocarpine that's the natural alkaloid and prototype it is given topically as eye drops what's it going to do constriction of that of the iris so meiosis so it can be used for acute angle closure glaucoma which is a it's a medical emergency surgery is the treatment but pilocarpine might be used in the interim it has been used for a long time for chronic open angle glaucoma but there are so many other drugs available now they're so much better okay i did say that bathanacol was the only oral it's the only quaternary ammonium compound that's oral pilocarpine is oral and it's called a sialagog which means it stimulates the salivary glands to secrete saliva. Remember that watery, copious saliva. So that will help in the treatment of dry mouth, which is called xerostomia. There's a certain autoimmune disease called Sjogren's Syndrome. That's it right here, Sjogren's Syndrome. That causes dry mouth and certain other symptoms. Now there are other treatments, such as ******* lemon drops. that's sometimes suggested. There are over-the-counter artificial salivas that can be used. This is an oral method in case the others are not effective for the individual patient. It has also been used following radiation therapy. We're thinking cancer there. As long as the salivary glands are still functioning. Okay. Sevimeline, same thing. That's what it's used for, ******, for xerostomia, and that's it. So, these are our quaternaries that are used, these three, and pilocarpine, and sevimeline, the tertiary compounds. Okay. Oops, I went backwards. Sorry. Just, okay, here we go. Adverse effects. Well, think now. These are going to have actions at all the peripheral muscarinic receptors. Pylocarpine is going to have actions also taken ****** in the CNS. What are they? Well, we have the lacrimation, the salivary secretions, bradycardia, and bradycardia and hypotension that can cause a reflex tachycardia if it's an abrupt hypotension. Dyspnea, trouble breathing because of the bronchoconstriction. So, think about the cautions now. What patients might be harmed by these adverse effects? Bratocardia, hypotension, reflex tachycardia, or bronchospasm. People who had a heart attack. People who have uncontrolled hypertension. Aortic aneurysm because of that tachycardia. Urinary obstruction, GI obstruction, because we're causing increased contraction of smooth muscle, increased movement of those smooth muscles. And that can make the obstruction worse, the consequences of the obstruction worse. Any kind of condition that could be adversely affected by cholinomimetics. Asthma. Any kind of respiratory disease. COPD. Peptic ulcer disease. Why peptic ulcer disease? Because of acid secretion. Increasing acid secretion. Hyperthyroidism. Because of the reflex tachycardia. And then GI and biliary, urinary, GI biliary and urinary obstruction, obstruction. We don't want those GI muscles, those various muscles to be contracting. Acetylcholine, well, these are ophthalmic issues that you should, that's for the surgeon. This is used in surgery. Methylcholine, well, bronchospasm can be severe. So if you are going to do or if you're watching the pulmonologist, the patient should have an adequate pulmonary function test. And that's referred to as an FEV1. You can learn about that later. Carbacol, blurred vision, carneal edema, headache. headache. We're putting in drops that are going to cause meiosis. It can cause corneal edema, and a lot of eye drops can actually cause headache, at least transiently. Bethanacol oral. So the blood pressure decreased. Remember that effect on the vascular endothelial cells causing nitric oxide synthesis. And if the blood pressure should drop, then tachycardia. This doesn't always happen, but we need to be aware that it could happen. Bronchoconstriction, that could definitely happen. Sweating, diaphoresis, activation of muscarinic M3 receptors on sweat glands. Tearing, salivation, nausea, abdominal cramps, urinary urgency because of the effects on the urinary bladder to promote micturition, to promote urination. Pylocarpine, again, the blurred vision, impaired vision. We're putting those drops in. They're causing meiosis. We're causing accommodation to near vision. And then the CNS effects, the dizziness, headache, a feeling of generalized weakness. And then the peripheral cholinergic effects on the muscarinic receptors. Sevimeline, same deal. It's all the same. H1, over and over and over. So learn the class effects, and it applies to all of them. CNS effects, mainly the pilocarpine. carping. Check your knowledge. Acetylcholinesterase can hydrolyze 5,000 acetylcholine molecules per second. Why then is the duration of action of acetylcholine instilled in the anterior chamber of the eye as long as six hours? Because there is a lower concentration of acetylcholinesterase in the eye. An asymptomatic 60 -year-old patient suspected of having asthma has a positive bronchoprovocation test using an ****** inhaled cholinergic agent. What are the mechanism of action and effects of the administered drug? I invite you to say the name to yourself. Administration of methacholine by oral inhalation activates M3 receptors and bronchial smooth muscle causing bronchoconstriction. In patients with pre -existing bronchial hyperreactivity, bronchoconstriction will be provoked at lower methacholine doses. A patient with a negative bronchoprovocation test is unlikely to have asthma. Bronchoprovocation testing may be useful for assessment of disease severity, prognosis, and plan of asthma treatment. What are the mechanism-related side effects of muscarinic receptor agonists? Salvation, upset stomach because of acid secretion, diarrhea, abdominal upset because of increased motility, urinary frequency and urgency and even incontinence, palpitations, blurred vision, visual disturbances and drugs affecting the CNS then drowsiness and the feeling of muscle weakness okay let's go to the nicotinic receptor direct agonists direct acting agonists pointed out again we have our nicotinic neuronal nicotinic receptors here at the adrenal medulla and that causes release of epinephrine and norepinephrine. We have it in both ganglia, parasympathetic and sympathetic, and at the neuromuscular junction. And then, of course, they're widely distributed in the CNS. Nicotine comes from nicotiana tobacum. I think you see tobacco there. and it has affinity for all nicotinic receptors but that's all no muscarinic receptors no any other type of receptors let's begin with nicotine here we have a simple structure again so it is well-absorbed, crosses the physiologic barriers well, crosses into the CNS. There are lots of formulations. It's mainly not taken ****** because it's extensive hepatic metabolism. So CNS and peripheral tissues, all of these various different ways that it can be taken. I mentioned extensively metabolized in the liver. Cotinine, as you can see, is an anagram of nicotine, is a major metabolite. There are a bunch of metabolites. I'm going to jump down here to the half-life. Cotinine has a very long half-life, and it can be used as a biomarker for nicotine use. It doesn't have nicotinic action. The metabolites go out through the kidney. It is pH -dependent. Nicotine, like pilocarpine, is an alkaloid, which means it's a weak base. In a high pH, much of it will be reabsorbed. very little will go out through the urine. In a low pH, and the urine tends to be more on the acidic side, there's a greater amount that is excreted in the bladder, less is reabsorbed. What is the meaning of that? Well, not sure exactly, but perhaps increased concentrations of nicotine stored in the bladder could be harmful. Inhalation and nasal has one to two hour half-life. Transdermal, four hours because it's stuck to the skin and it's going to be delivering the drug for a longer period of time. Biphasic effects. This is a really important concept that you must take home with you. Stimulation, a small dose causes rapid depolarization. Remember, this is an ion channel. Rapid depolarization of the postsynaptic membranes where the nicotine receptor, nicotinic receptor is located. And if it's strong enough, it will facilitate an impulse transmission. Now, high doses can cause something called a blocking effect, the opposite effect of stimulation. It's called depolarizing blockade and this results from prolonged agonist occupancy and that occurs from high doses. Although membrane voltage returns to the resting level, remember lots of nicotine there in the synapse causing this constant activity at the nicotinic receptor. So the membrane voltage may return to the resting level, but that receptor becomes desensitized to the agonist. It won't respond. It becomes refractory. So it's blocked. Its action is blocked. And that's called depolarizing blockade. It will initially open, but then with this prolonged exposure to the nicotine, it will just become desensitized. Persistent depression of all autonomic ganglia, remember where these are located, and neuromuscular junctions. In the CNS, they're located in various areas, including presynaptic, prejunctional, and that will cause neurotransmitter release. So why do people use nicotine? Because of the pleasure reward pathway that gets stimulated. And that nicotine, this ionotropic receptor, now think about it in terms of neurotransmitter release, is going to cause the release of dopamine, of norepinephrine, of acetylcholine, of other amines, of amino acids. So it's this widespread effect. It can cause dizziness, tremor, respiratory excitation, vomiting. This, of course, is going to depend on the dose and whether or not the patient is used to the nicotine. Large doses, we're talking toxicity now, can cause convulsions, respiratory failure, convulsions, seizures, and respiratory failure, both at the CNS level and by depolarizing block at the respiratory muscles. And that, of course, can lead to death. Chronic exposure causes an increased density, an increased number of these nicotinic receptors in the CNS. peripheral effects well think about the ganglia both parasympathetic and sympathetic so activation of the sympathetic remember the vasculature is not innervated by the parasympathetic it is only by the sympathetic so activation of the sympathetic nervous system can cause vasoconstriction. Increased heart rate, that's what it does. Increased blood pressure, that's going to stimulate the baroreceptors, and that's going to cause reflexive responses to try and bring down the blood pressure. At the adrenal medulla, it's causing catecholamine release. So there, again, sympathetic effects in the gut. Increased tone and motor activity. Why? Because it is the parasympathetic side that is the predominant side in the gut. And the glands, it's going to cause lots of secretions. and that would be called caught followed by inhibition when there is depolarizing block occurring so what do we use the actual nicotine as a drug for smoking cessation the point is to reduce the cravings and withdrawal symptoms and it does work can we use it in the pregnant individual? Well, the only evidence we have of nicotine in the pregnant individual is from smoking. And the incidence of birth defects following nicotine replacement therapy might be similar, but we don't know. So we prefer to avoid it. We don't know, we avoid. So what do we do for the pregnant person? Behavior. Behavior therapy is recommended. Toxicity. Acute toxicity. What are we thinking about here? Little kids, especially little kids. They're highly susceptible. Cholinergic excess, central stimulation, hypertension, hypotension, tachycardia, all this sympathetic stuff going on, followed by hypotension and bradycardia because of the depolarizing block. Convulsions, death by respiratory arrest. That's both central and at the neuromuscular side, the respiratory muscles. So the depolarizing block mechanism to summarize initial stimulation of the central autonomic and neuromuscular nicotinic receptors. Prolonged agonist occupation of the receptors causes persistent depression, depolarizing blockade. Blockade at the motor end plate causes muscle fasciculation. So that's like that jerky kind of effect, muscle weakness, and that will then go to flaccid paralysis and respiratory muscle paralysis. Let's talk about varenicline now. All right, so that was nicotine. Nicotine does what nicotine does. Berenicline was developed to promote the actions of nicotine in the CNS, but not to the same degree, plus block nicotine from binding to those receptors. And it's used as a smoking cessation aid to reduce the cravings and withdrawal symptoms. So that's the big picture of varenicline. Smoking cessation is a partial agonist of these receptors. Ah, well, it's a partial agonist of a component of these receptors called the alpha-4-beta-2 subgroup on the neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor. So you can see there it's more selective than we see with nicotine. the peak pharmacokinetics this is something called a favorable pharmacokinetic profile why great bioavailability taken ****** low plasma protein binding very limited hepatic metabolism renal excretion of unchanged drug so renal dose adjustment and a decent half-life so it can be taken once a day. That's what makes it favorable. All of these together, all these properties together make it a so-called favorable profile. It can cause nausea, so how do we mitigate that? We advise the patient to take it after eating with a full glass of water. Of course, any drug can cause allergic reactions. And CNS, you expect CNS effects because that's where it's supposed to be working. Headache, insomnia, abnormal drains, impaired physical and mental abilities. The incidence of adverse pregnancy outcomes following maternal use of varenicline is not greater than the pregnancy outcomes of pregnant patients who smoke. So that's how it's worded in the literature. What does that mean for the pregnant patient? That's a discussion you'll have. with that individual. Drug interactions? Well, taking it with nicotine. The whole point is that it's blocking the nicotinic receptors so that nicotine, I mean, it's partially blocking, so that nicotine won't bind. And if nicotine is used, it can outcompete the varenicline at the nicotine receptors, plus it can increase the adverse effects. Now, draw your attention to this bottom right here. Alcohol may enhance neuropsychiatric effects. When the drug was first approved, post -marketing surveillance suggested that there was an increase in neuropsychiatric effects in individuals who were taking varenicilline. In other words, they would have behavior issues, they could be even psychotic, and alcohol would be increasing these effects. Aggression. Since then, more studies have been done, appropriate strong studies have been done that have shown that varenicline does not, in fact, increase these neuropsychiatric effects. But when used with alcohol, we may see an increase in them. So that's the whole story with varenicline. Varenicline action, this is just a figure I found to try and help you visualize how the drug works. Here are nicotine receptors here, and we see various neurotransmitters have been, what's the word I want, have been released as a result of binding to the nicotine receptors up here. during prolonged period of nicotine absence, all of this goes away. Here's the dopamine down here, much less dopamine release. So this would be about the cravings. If nicotine is just withdrawn, we have all of this release causing all of these cravings and withdrawal symptoms. Here's varenicline, partial agonist, also blocks nicotine, and therefore we have much reduced dopamine being released, but there's still some, which will reduce the cravings and withdrawal symptoms. And highlighted here are the sites of action. Where are nicotinic receptors located? CNS, ANS ganglia, chromophane cells of adrenal medulla. What type of receptors are nicotinic receptors? Ligand-gated ionotropic ion channels activated by acetylcholine binding to sites on alpha subunits adjacent to neighboring subunits. I have seen that particular piece of information asked on board review questions. Opening of the channels increases permeability to sodium, potassium, and in some cases, calcium. A healthy adult patient wishes to quit smoking. What two drugs in this category can be recommended? I'm hearing you in my mind's ear. Nicotine and varenicline. Nicotine is available in a lot of different products, including vaping, and varenicline is oral. The difference is, nicotine is a full agonist, varenicline is a partial agonist, is alpha-4-beta-2, and neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. They both help reduce cravings and withdrawal symptoms. So what are signs and symptoms of nicotine? Toxicity, cholinergic excess, stimulation of receptors on affective cells, CNS stimulation, sympathetic excess because of the stimulation at the ganglia, followed by hypotension and bradycardia because of the polarizing block of the autonomic ganglia, Seizures, death by respiratory arrest. And in summary, I put everything into tables. I hope that will help you to review. And the parasympathetic system is the rest and digest side of the autonomic nervous system.