Welcome to this lecture on the basics of diagnosing the nominates and ***** bone. Here are today's session objectives. Please note that today's lecture is to introduce you to the screening tests that are used to answer the question of whether there may be somatic dysfunction in the pelvis, in other words, in nominate or ***** somatic dysfunctions. However, this lecture will not be covering the individual somatic dysfunctions. Those will be covered in a later lecture. Here's today's outline. I will introduce the static landmarks at the very end in order for you to get a little bit of a head start but will not go into how you use the various landmarks in order to ultimately make a pelvic somatic dysfunction diagnosis. That will be covered separately in a lab prep lecture and lab portion on the pelvis. Please also review the practice questions at the end to test your understanding of today's lecture. The following 14 slides are to give you an overview of some of the functional significance of the pelvis and hopefully give you a better understanding and appreciation of this region and help you to understand why we would even be interested in diagnosing somatic dysfunction in the pelvis. Aim to understand the general points in these slides, but you do not have to worry about memorizing specific details of the anatomy presented. We begin by recalling that the nominate bone comes in three parts at birth, the ileum, ischium, and *****. And these parts come together at the acetabulum, where the head of the femur resides. Recalling this is useful because in an adult, one often considers the nominate bone as a whole, but it's important to understand that they have origins in three parts, and also somatic dysfunction can be specifically identified as it relates to the ilium, the ischium, and the ***** bones. Joints allow for mobility. Two of the most significant joints in the body in terms of their role in structural support and mobility, as well as the significant amount of forces that go through the region are the SI joints, abbreviated here as the SIJ. In males, the ligaments of the sacroiliac joints are particularly well developed and strong. In females, in addition to the need for structural integrity, there is also a need for relative laxity of the pelvic sacroiliac joint ligaments. This is due to the need for the pelvic girdle to adapt in shape during pregnancy and delivery. The motion at the SI joints is more and more limited as one ages. Keep in mind also that the sacroiliac joint has a slight L-shape or a C -shape, and that can influence the biomechanics of the region. Anteriorly, the ***** symphysis is a fibrocollagenous joint. This means that there is some mobility that occurs in this region, and hence somatic dysfunction can also occur at this region as it also does at the sacroiliac joint posteriorly. These diagrams illustrate the anterior and posterior sacroiliac joint ligaments. Make note of their density and just sheer amount as well as their varying orientation. This should give you an idea of the significant amount of forces they must be able to withstand as well as the directions of these forces. This is understandable given that the pelvis connects the lower extremities to the spine and provides a foundation for body support and locomotion. The motion that occurs around the SI joints and ***** symphysis occurs during among other things the gait cycle during flexion and extension of the spine. Side bending and rotation also impact the sacroiliac joints and the sacroiliac joint as mentioned earlier also needs to conform to the needs of pregnancy and childbirth. Next, we move on to the muscles of the pelvic floor. These muscles provide support for the contents of the lower abdomen and the pelvic floor, sometimes referred to as the pelvic diaphragm. There are various muscles that comprise this region, two of which are the levator ani and the coccygeus. This does not mean to imply that these are the most important, but definitely they are among the muscles that we need to consider when it comes to issues such as low back pain or pelvic floor dysfunction or pelvic pain. The pelvic wall also consists of the piriformis and obturator internus. Again there are numerous muscles to speak about so this is just a highlight of these regions that we might want to consider. I would like to now highlight some muscles that are important for the lumbar and pelvic region. The muscles of the trunk and extremity allow for a locomotion. The abdominal muscles in conjunction with the lumbar spine muscles are important for core stability and mobility. The quadrice lumborum has its origin in the 12th rib and inserts into the posterior iliac crest. And as you might recall from the lumbar lecture, it is important for actions such as ipsilateral side bending as well as extension. And it has an important role in low back pain and pelvic complaints. The ilial psoas which actually consists of the psoas major and the iliacus muscles are important in low back pain, hip and pelvic and groin symptoms also. This is because not only is it important for hip flexion but it is an important stabilizer of the lumbar spine. Here we have a view of the anterior musculature of the low extremities. One can appreciate the predominantly superior inferior orientation of the muscle fibers but there is some medial lateral orientation also hence the differential pull and function of these muscles can impact the forces that are sensed in the pelvis because of the attachments of these muscles or some of these muscles to the pelvis and also how to make this function in pelvis by potentially impacting the lines of forces, for example, may impact the function of the low extremities. The comments just made for the anterior musculature also apply to the posterior musculature of the low extremities. Although not shown in this diagram, the gluteus maximus is an important muscle. It's a powerful extensor of the hip, so actions such as going from a seated to standing position requires optimal functioning of the gluteus maximus for that function to be smooth and efficient. Of course, in the case of going from seated to standing, that also requires contraction of the quadriceps in order to extend at the knees. So it's always important to understand how different muscles combine in order to achieve a particular action. The hamstrings are described here and are important for the function of knee flexion. Next, I wish to just briefly consider the nervous system. This of course does not do it justice given the important role of the nervous system in sensory, autonomic, and locomotive function. We can look at the diagram and in a way imagine how the pelvic girdle serves as a scaffolding of sorts for the nervous tissue. We have the sacrosympathetic trunk, which are extensions of the lumbar sympathetic chain ganglia. These fuse over the coccyx to form the single ganglion impar. We have the parasympathetic nerves of the pelvic splatonic region that arise off the ventral rami of the S2 to S4 region, and these supply the parasympathetic innervation to the left colon and inferior hypogastric plexus. The inferior hypogastric plexus is both parasympathetic and sympathetic in nature, and there are smaller plexi that innovate the ******, bladder, prostate, uterus, and vagina, and hence its important role in autonomic function of the organs. Earlier I mentioned the performance as one of the muscles of the pelvic wall. In this diagram, it's shown various anatomical variations. In a small percentage of the population, the sciatic nerve actually pierces through the piriformis muscle. But more generally speaking, if there's anatomical shifts in the relationship between a sacrum and anominate bone and hip, such as from somatic dysfunction, if there is anatomical variation as shown here, or if there's spasm of the piriformis muscle, as well as other muscular structure is not shown here, then that can lead to potential irritation of the sciatic nerve and lead to symptoms such as buttock pain or hip or lower extremity pain, and even altered function of lower extremities, such as motor weakness, for example. Next, we consider the viscera. While it's true that the nervous system plays a significant role in the function of the viscera it's also important to consider that the pelvis for example is a container for the pelvic organs and hence the bony and myofascial structures and any aberrations potentially can impact the function of these organs such as their circulation and lymphatic drainage and even do interactions with the nerves impact the autonomic function of these various organs fascial condensations or thickenings of the myofascial support structures are called anatomically as ligaments and these carry blood vessels and nerves so one has to always consider the entire package that not only do these ligaments help support these various structures but they actually are important for the physiology of these structures and therefore because ligaments have attachments, not just to the organs, but also to potentially to bony structures, that aberrations in the bony structures of the pelvis can influence the function of these organs. And hence, it's important to consider the role of somatic dysfunction and treatment in order to optimize organ function. Although the abdominal diaphragm is the main driver for respiration and must work in coordination with other structures. For the pelvis, the abdominal and pelvic diaphragms must work together in order to properly deliver blood, oxygen, and nutrients to the various tissues and will properly remove waste products through the venous and lymphatic circulation. Hence, optimal pelvic motion free from any restriction is important for proper physiologic function. During a gait cycle, the sacroiliac joint has to sustain weight and transfer motion from the feet to the rest of the body. The physiologic motions of the sacrum and ilia occur around various theoretical axes of motion. So magdysfunction affecting any of these axes can hinder the gait, require compensatory changes both locally in the pelvis, sacrum, and lumbar spine region as well as potentially the rest of the body. This can impact functions such as speed, stride length, the rhythm of the gait, and can lead to symptoms such as pain, balance issues, and even can alter energy expenditure. During pregnancy, due to the mechanical demands of carrying a growing fetus as well as hormonal changes, the relationship of the pelvis and sacrum change. The center of gravity shifts anteriorly, the sacroiliac joints and the ***** symphysis become more lax. There's also an increase in the lumbar and cervical lodoses, the thoracic kyphosis, as well as an increase in the anterior pelvic tilt, meaning that both enominate bones rotate anteriorly. These changes are necessary, however they can lead to symptoms such as pain or low back tightness, and therefore being able to diagnose and treat somatic dysfunction in the lumbar and pelvic regions, for example, is quite useful during pregnancy. This slide is a reminder that when we say somatic dysfunction, we are also referring to the various components of the body, the skeletal, arthrodial, myofascial, and their related vascular lymphatic and neural elements. In other words, there may be positional asymmetry or restricted motion, but in terms of what's actually going on, there can be quite more, as described by this definition. Therefore, it's important to read into the tissue, so to speak, and understand that whatever we diagnose in terms of the criteria for somatic dysfunction, meaning the tarte changes, that there could be accompanying physiologic changes. Please keep in mind that our evaluation of the pelvis and its related structure, the sacrum, begins with the history. In other words, the chief complaint and then the details of the history of peasant illness, past medical history, and so on. The goal of treatment is to restore structural relationship and function between the various components of the body, therefore addressing both symptoms as well as function. Here's a photograph of the front of Grand Central Station in Manhattan. We can imagine that if this were the pelvis then the various architectural components of the structure would be comparable to the various landmarks that we look for in the pelvis when trying to diagnose it. Here we can still see the facade or the front of Grand Central terminal. However, from a bird's eye view, we can see there's much more to it. So if we think of the pelvis and the entire pelvic structure, both anteriorly as well as posteriorly, one can appreciate that just like the pelvis, this building is really a container. It's three -dimensional. It has an anterior, posterior, as well as lateral aspects and an interior aspect. We can appreciate the ventilation system that's on the top. So one can think of this for example as the vessels and even nervous system like the wiring that goes with the ventilation system for example so the point i'm trying to make is that when we look for somatic dysfunction going back to the definition there are many more components to it so it's always important for us to appreciate that when we diagnose asymmetry and hopefully treat it adequately with OMT that we are also restoring the functionality, the internal architecture, if you will, of what is contained within the pelvis. Here I have listed the basic steps for osteopathic structure examination of the pelvis. However, what is not listed here is equally important, and these include the static posture exam, looking at the front, back, and side aspects of the person. For example, if they come in limping or hunched over at the waist or unable to bend sideways at the lumbar spine, this already gives you an idea of what might be going on in the pelvis and will probably prompt further examination beyond just structure examination of the pelvis. We begin the pelvic exam with the standing flexion test, then progress to the supine and prone static examination, and finally looking at various landmarks to arrive at a structural somatic dysfunction diagnosis of the pelvis. The first and primary test for screening the pelvis for somatic dysfunction is the standing flexion test. By somatic dysfunction I am referring to a nominate somatic dysfunction or ***** bone somatic dysfunction or both. This test does not give us the specific diagnosis, but it does clue us in to the possibility that there could be somatic dysfunction in the pelvis. It is basically testing for restrictive movement of the pelvis, meaning the nominate, relative to the sacrum on a particular side. Now there is the possibility that both sides are dysfunctional. However, typically even if that were true, typically one side would be more restricted than the other side, and therefore the test will still reveal itself on one side. To perform this test, the patient is initially standing fully upright at the waist, which is not shown on the photo. The feet, however, are shoulder width apart as shown in this photo. The provider is standing behind the patient and places the thumbs over the PSIS on each side, so bilaterally. It's important to keep the eye over the patient's midline and at about the level of the PSIS. The provider can be standing as shown or seated. The patient is then instructed to slowly bend forward at the waist. What this does is it carries the sacral base forward, meaning the top of the sacrum forward into flexion. And eventually, this motion through the SI joint is carried to the ilium, or the nominate, which also rotates anteriorly. Because the PSIS is part of the nominate bone, when this happens, eventually the thumbs will move cephalad and slightly anterior, because again, the torso is flexing. But we are looking for which thumb moves first and farthest. So this might seem counterintuitive initially because if there is restricted movement, then why would we be looking for the thumb that moves further? This is because when the sacrum bends forward, as the patient bends forward, if the SI joint, meaning the sacroiliac joint is moving freely, then there will be a lag period before that motion is transmitted to the nominate bone to also bring it into anterior rotation. When it is restricted, then it's as though that sacroiliac joint on a particular side becomes more as a unit. So when the patient bends forward, then as the sacrum bends forward, then the nominate bone on that side will also bend forward first and farther than the other side. Therefore, a positive standing flexion test reveals a restriction of the sacroiliac joint at about the axis that determines the movement of the ilium relative to the sacrum. Hence, it is specific for ileosacral dysfunction, In other words, pelvic somatic dysfunction. Here's a posted review of how the provider's thumbs are placed over each PSIS. Again, it's important to keep the dominant eye of the provider over the midline of the patient's body at about the same level as the PSIS's. Even before the test, while the patient is initially standing upright at the waist, we can determine if there is some asymmetry in terms of one PSIS being more cephalad or caudad compared to the other. It's important to have good technique. Typically, this means that with your partner's permission, you will be placing the thumbs over the skin so you can maximally appreciate the bony surface of the PSIS. The thumbs are also horizontal as shown and it's important to also keep the same part of the thumb pad over the same part of the PSIS generally it's advisable to place the thumbs on the inferior aspect of the PSIS meaning the inferior slope of the PSIS because as the patient bends forward there's a tendency of the thumbs to roll over the PSIS and therefore to come off of that structure therefore for making the test less reliable. So by having the thumb pads placed on the inferior slope of each PSIS, and making sure that we stay on that bony contact as the patient bends forward, then one can have a more reliable test and a more accurate test. Here's a written summary of the standing flexion test. As I described earlier, the test is positive on the side where your thumb placed over the PSIS moves first and farthest. Typically the thumb that moves first is also the thumb that moves farther than the other side. So practically speaking the thumb that moves further meaning more cephalat is the positive side but you can practice this on your own and pay attention and to see for yourself if this is indeed the case where the thumb that moves first is also the thumb that moves farther. You can think of the standing flexion test as the initial or entry test to diagnosing the pelvis. There are two important points to keep in mind though. Number one, a positive test does not tell you what the specific somatic dysfunction is. In order to arrive at that, you will need to look at the specific patterns of asymmetries in the various landmarks that you will learn about in the future in order to come up with the specific somatic dysfunction diagnosis. Keep in mind that there could be more than just one type of somatic dysfunction in the pelvis, and this is common in practice and not just for the pelvis. The second point to keep in mind is that sometimes the test is positive, yet you do not find actual public somatic dysfunction. So in other words, the test is falsely positive. This applies to many tests, not just the standing flexion test, so keep in mind this concept of a false positive test. How do you know it's falsely positive? If you end up, again, looking for pelvic somatic dysfunction and you do not end up finding it. There are various reasons for a falsely positive standing flexion test, and it's not the intent of this lecture to go into that, but one possibility is that there is somatic dysfunction elsewhere in the body because the body is interconnected and that somatic dysfunction, for example muscle tension or imbalance, ends up affecting the sacroiliac joint motion in such a way that the standing flexion test is positive, yet it is actually not caused by a pelvic somatic dysfunction. Second screening test that we can use and should use to screen the pelvis for somatic dysfunction is the ASIS compression test, also known as the pelvic rock test, or the pelvic rock for short. This test can indicate iliosacral or sacroiliac dysfunction. Therefore, it is not specific for iliosacral dysfunction. The structure being tested is the same. It is the sacroiliac joint. However, the interpretation is different or potentially different. To perform this test, the heels of the provider's hands are placed over each ASIS and pressure is applied in a mostly posterior but also slightly medial direction to aim towards the sacroiliac joint. Note how the vector or force closely matches the angle of the plane of the sacroiliac joint. One side is pressed on and then the other side and a comparison is made to determine how much movement there is as well as the firmness or laxity of the resistance when the end of the movement is reached. So for a normal sacroiliac joint, the amount of movement is typically very slight and it's more one of assessing the degree of resistance that one encounters. And as with any test, the more one performs this test, then the more one is able to gauge how abnormal the test is and to be able to determine if one side is more abnormal compared to the other. For example, if there's a positive standing flexion test on the left and a positive ASIS compression test on the right, then the simplest interpretation, but definitely not the only interpretation, but the simplest interpretation would be that there is a pelvic somatic dysfunction on the left, meaning the side of the standing flexion test, and a sacroiliac dysfunction on the right, on the side of the ASIS compression test. In practice, if one has a discrepancy, then the first step would be logically to perform both tests again to make sure that we are consistent. And then if they still disagree, then make a determination of what the ASIS compression test truly indicates. Sometimes we don't know, and one would have to go through the full diagnosis of the endominates as well as the sacrum to cover both possibilities, perform any treatment, and reassess these areas, including performing the standing flexion test and the ASIS compression test again. Here is a written description of the ASIS compression test. Again, we are assessing the sacroiliac joints one side at a time. There should be relatively gentle pressure but still firm enough to be able to test the sacroiliac joints. Please do not confuse sacroiliac joint with sacroiliac dysfunction. The structure is the sacroiliac joint, whether it is iliosacral dysfunction or sacroiliac dysfunction. The dysfunctions relate or refer to the motion of the ilium relative to the sacrum or the sacrum relative to the ilium. And I will have a slide in a moment that will clarify that point. We name the positive side for the side that offers more resistance and less motion. That's not written here, but typically the side that has more resistance is also the side that has less motion. But the most reliable measure, because motion is typically very slight anyway, the most reliable measure is the degree of resistance that one encounters. So significant resistance on one side compared to the other side indicates that there's a positive test on the side of increased resistance. Now we come to the C-deflection test. this test is specific for sacroiliac dysfunction so this is actually a test then not for diagnosing the pelvis meaning not for diagnosing a nominate somatic dysfunction or ***** somatic dysfunction however i present it here because you will be soon encountering this test when you learn about the sacrum so i want to present it here to contrast it with the standing flexion test and so that you also get an early exposure to this test. This test is testing for sacroiliac motion, and therefore, if it's positive, it indicates sacrosomatic dysfunction. The seated flexion test is performed seated, hence the name. The details, however, are otherwise the same as the standing flexion test. The provider places the thumbs over the PSIS's and as I had recommended earlier, typically it's best to place them on the inferior slope of the PSIS. The patient is asked to bend forward slowly at the waist and the provider looks for the thumb that moves first and farthest and names that side as the positive side. Because the patient is seated, the mechanics of the motion at the sacroiliac joint are slightly different. And the rotation, even though it still involves flexion of the sacrum and anterior rotation of the pelvis in this test, the axis of motion is slightly different. And therefore, it's assessing for sacroiliac motion, meaning movement of the sacrum relative to the pelvis. Another way to think of it is because the patient is seated and therefore stabilizing the pelvic bones and the feet are planted on the floor also which adds to this stability the pelvis is relatively stable not completely stable but relatively stable and therefore as the patient bends forward one is assessing movement of the sacrum relative to the pelvis hence sacroiliac motion and if it's positive test, then that signals the presence of some form of sacrosomatic dysfunction. Here's a quick summary that both shows the similarities and differences between these two tests. As I indicated earlier, this slide is to help you distinguish between ileosacral versus sacroiliac motion. Iliosacral, meaning pelvic motion, refers to the motion of the ilium relative to the sacrum along the SI joint. The theoretical axis of motion is the inferior transverse axis which is designated by the number three in the diagram on the right. Sacroiliac motion however refers to the motion of the sacrum relative to the ilium. The theoretical axis of motion is the middle transverse axis designated by number two in the diagram. Notice how this axis is both superior as well as anterior compared to the inferior axis about which iliosacral motion occurs. Please take a few moments to review this slide. While beyond the scope of this talk, I want to share a few clinical pointers when it comes to the importance of pelvic diagnosis in practice. The following slides will introduce the various landmarks that are used to diagnose pelvic somatic dysfunctions. I will not be discussing specifically how to interpret the various asymmetries in the landmarks in order to arrive at a specific pelvic somatic dysfunction diagnosis. You will learn how to do this later on in a lab prep lecture and lab portions for the pelvis. So for now, just understand why we perform the various tests and how to interpret them and you will later combine this understanding with a discussion on the various landmark asymmetries so you can ultimately diagnose pelvic somatic dysfunction. In order to come to a conclusion of a particular somatic dysfunction for the pelvis, one needs to check the pelvis anteriorly and posteriorly. Although these diagrams appear like they're standing, to check one should have the patient supine to check for the anterior landmarks and prone to check for the posterior landmarks that would be the easiest approach and by heights of the landmarks we mean any vertical asymmetry in other words it's one side more cephalad than the other sometimes we say higher or lower but it's best to use anatomical terms how do we know which side to name well we name it based on the side of the standing flexion test because the standing flexion test tells us which side has the pelvic somatic dysfunction make sure the patient also sits the pelvis first before comparing the sides because as you can imagine if someone just lies on examination table they might just unknowingly be lying in an awkward position where any asymmetry is due to just the virtue of how they initially lied on the table so therefore one has them bend the waist and the hips and knees and gently lift the buttocks off the table and lower it back onto the table and straighten the legs. And this tends to normalize any artificial asymmetries. When you check for landmarks, it's also important to have your dominant eye over the person's midline and use your thumbs or fingers on the same landmark in the same relative position of the landmark and make sure that, for example, if you're using the thumbs underneath the ASISs, that they are both oriented horizontally. Otherwise, if one thumb is angulated upward or downward, meaning cephalad or caudad, then it can artificially give you an impression that one side is higher or lower when it is in fact not that case. Here we have two pictures of examination of landmarks. On the left, we have examination of the ***** rami. The finger pads are placed on a superior aspect of the ***** rami in order to look for any unleveling of these landmarks. Again, you name it based on a side of the positive standing flexion test. On the right picture we have the providers thumbs placed either just below or just above the medial malleoli. I find it typically to be more convenient to place it inferior to the malleoli with the sides of the thumbs flush against the inferior aspect of the medial malleoli. Keep in mind that the medial malleoli is a relatively accessible landmark and any unleveling can imply an imbalance of the nominate bones but the person might actually have a true leg length discrepancy and that can also cause unleveling of the medial malleoli so it is a useful landmark and typically will support or be consistent with your suspected nominate diagnosis but it doesn't always do that and part of the reason could be because of an actual leg length discrepancy keep in mind also that if a person does not have a lower extremity on one side or the other or there's a cast, for example, on one leg, then this landmark is not accessible for comparison and it actually is useful but it's not critical for you to use in order to come up with an inominate somatic dysfunction diagnosis. Here we have additional landmarks. I stress the importance a proper hand placement and during practice to both observe and palpate these landmarks over time you will find that perhaps your sense of palpation is actually more gives you a clearer idea than even observing but it is important to develop both skills and you name it for the side that has the positive standing flexion test so there's nothing intrinsically more abnormal if it's superior versus inferior, it's, again, you name it based on the side of the standing flexion test, if there's any asymmetry. So if the standing flexion test is on the left, and it's superior on that side, then you call that side a superior. So left PSIS superior, for example. But if it's the right side that has a standing flexion test, you can call it left superior PSIS, but it makes more sense and more efficient for you to describe it as a right-inferior PSIS. Please take the time to complete the following self-practice questions on your own. These questions will give you a chance to test your understanding of the material presented. The answers will be posted at the end of the week. Good luck, and thank you for your attention.