Welcome, students, to the pharmacology of the cholinomimetics. Again, this time we'll be talking about the indirect-acting drugs, the cholinesterase inhibitors. Dr. Goldstein speaking. Please contact me if you'd like to chat about pharmacology. Groups are welcome. The learning objectives. I've put titles here so that you can be aware of what the content of the learning objective is, mechanisms, mechanisms, mechanisms. The suggested materials to help you learn. You can learn it by any method that works for you. These are just suggested materials. You don't have to watch the video if you don't want to. You don't have to do anything except I highly recommend the practice questions because you can test your knowledge with them and the questions will also help you integrate concepts. Preparation materials should you choose to use them the review books have practice questions in them if you want to have a look at them. And I have key points for you. You may use them or not. The idea is to kind of organize it for you, let you know what you need to know, and maybe it can even help you with your review time. I've put titles on each of the slides to help you know what the content is. and a couple of tables here that is boiling it down for you. So let's talk about our cholinesterase inhibitors. Why are they indirect acting? Because it is the acetylcholine that is doing the action. The cholinesterase inhibitors inhibit acetylcholinesterase, which prevents the degradation of acetylcholine, that causes increasing levels of acetylcholine in the synapse, which will enhance its action. So let's have a look now at the structure activity relationship. It is relevant, as you will see when we take a look at the mechanism of action. Physostigmine is an alkaloid. It is the original prototype. It has a tertiary amino group here. The others in this portion have an ammonium compound here, each one of them. And that's important for the mechanism, which I'll get to. Oh, I circled the wrong one. Ammonium right here. Edrophonium, that's it. It's just this real simple alcohol compound. Neostigmine and pyridostigmine are the most important drugs in the group. They have a carbamate here, whereas you may remember acetylcholine had a carboxyl group here this is in this is a the the reason for the longer duration of action of these drugs as compared to acetylcholine in this boot-shaped circle i have put the alzheimer drugs denepozil is the only one i'm going to ask you to remember you see these structures are quite different uh you don't have to memorize them. I do want to point out that rivastigmine is a stigmine, stigmine, stigmine, and it also has a carbamol group that is going to be related to its function. Looking now on the right hand side, it's labeled organophosphates. It has this phosphate group here and this is the group that's cleaved off. The carbamate is cleaved off. Parathione is no longer available. It's an insecticide, very toxic, toxic to the insects, toxic to birds, mammals, people. Sarin is a gas, and it is a warfare gas. malathione is actually used as a drug these shaded parts here are to point out that mammals and birds are able to detoxify this organophosphate which is why it can be used topically as a drug this is just a brief reminder of the synthesis exocytosis and actions of acetylcholine Down here is the acetylcholinesterase. It's at the post -synaptic area. Actions. Indirect acting cholinomimetics inhibit the hydrolytic action of acetylcholinesterase. That's the point. They inhibit acetylcholinesterase's activity, which is a hydrolytic action. Acetylcholine accumulates in the vicinity of the cholinergic nerve terminals. And that increased in the concentration of acetylcholine there can enhance, also called augment, the acetylcholine activity. The greater concentration of the drug, greater probability of activating its receptors, both nicotinic and muscarinic. Accumulation increases the potential for stimulation, even excessive stimulation, of cholinergic receptors throughout the central and peripheral nervous systems. Neostigmine and pyridostigmine do not cross the blood -brain barrier, so it would be stimulation throughout the peripheral nervous system for those drugs. The picture here of molecules in the synapse. I like the picture. Why are cholinesterase inhibitors called indirect acting cholinomimetics? And what are the effects of inhibiting the actions of acetylcholinesterase and other cholinesterases? They are called indirect acting because they increase levels of acetylcholine in the synapse and acetylcholine does the work. And what are the effects of inhibiting the actions of cholinesterase? Well, to increase the levels of acetylcholine in the synapse by preventing its degradation. The subclasses are the quaternary alcohol, that's the adrophonium. I pointed that out before, a simple molecule. The carbamic acid esters, which will carbamylate the enzyme, these are neostigmine, pyridostigmine, phisostigmine, all have stars on them. The organophosphates that are used therapeutically are malathion and echosiophate, which is why I have stars on them. It's essential to understand, however, that organophosphates are insecticides and nerve agents as well and to know their actions and effects. Cholinesterase inhibitors for symptomatic Alzheimer's disease are denepozil, rivastigmine, and galantamine. Only denepozil has a star on it. You don't have to memorize the other two for this course. Donepazil is the first one in the group. It represents the group, and it's widely used called Aricept, and this is the one that you should focus on. All right, let's take a look at the pharmacokinetics. I've highlighted in this orange color, this very light orange color, the drug -specific effects. Class effects are really the rest of them. So, know the class effects first. They are administered. Only physostigmine crosses the blood -brain barrier. They are all metabolized by cholinesterases, plasma cholinesterases, tissue cholinesterases, acetylcholinesterases. Why? Because, well, that's the target of their action. The bioavailability matters only for pyridostigmine. They are excreted, the water-soluble ones, through the urine. Makes sense, right? The alkaloid, the older one, the plant product, has very little renal excretion. So now I want to point out certain features. for neostigmine and pyridostigmine. Large amounts are excreted unchanged in the urine, so there must be adjustment of the dosage for patients who have renal insufficiency. We don't want the drug accumulating to greater concentrations than is necessary for the therapeutic effect because that can increase the risk of toxicity. Pyridostigmine is the only one that's oral, has pretty poor bioavailability as you would anticipate because it's water soluble, it's polar, doesn't cross physiological barriers very well, but it is dosed to get adequate levels in the bloodstream to produce its effect. has a duration of maybe three to four hours when it's given this way. So it has to be taken lots of times a day. And this, of course, is going to vary according to the patient. And the dosing is actually based on the response. Neostigmine, only injectable. Dosing, again, is based on response. Androfonium, really, really brief duration of action, which we would expect because of its simple molecule and its weak action, which we are going to see in a minute. Pyridostigmine also doesn't have a very long duration of action. Okay, mechanism. We're going to look at acetylcholinesterase inactivation of acetylcholine. So we'll start with the physiologic activity. The ammonium part binds here to the anionic site. I see this cation here, electrostatically binding here. And the other part of acetylcholine, the carboxyl group, binding here to this usually called esteratic site. and it's a serine. So I want to draw your attention over here. The carboxyl group binds to a catalytic triad. In this esteratic site, there is a catalytic triad. And so the drug binds to this serine in here, the drug, I mean the acetylcholine. Now, this portion is broken off and that becomes choline, which gets recycled. That leaves the acetic acid part here, the acetate, stuck to the serine. So either way, I'm getting ahead of myself. So water comes in, and that will split the bond. So we have hydrolysis step here, and that will release the acetate, the acetic acid. So the acetic acid will just diffuse away, and the choline now will be recycled. So bottom line, hydrolysis of acetylcholine releases choline, acetic acid, now we have our active enzyme back, and acetylcholine action is terminated. And this is a really, really quick thing, less than a millisecond, just about intermediate. I mean, just about immediate. So now, let's think about this a different way. Okay, imagine now we have a drug, let's say neostigmine. Neostigmine has this portion, ammonium portion, and instead of this carboxyl, this acetic acid portion here, it's a carbamyl portion. Okay, it will bind to the enzyme in the same way with the anionic side, and it will bind to the serine and the catalytic triad. The difference is the hydrolysis step, where the water will come in and hydrolyze the bond, but it takes much, much, much, much, much longer than a millisecond. It can take minutes to hours. So during that time, acetylcholine cannot access the acetylcholinesterase. It will accumulate. Pretty simple idea. The edrophonium is just known as a competitive inhibitor. It binds electrostatically only at that anionic site. and then it rapidly dissociates and that's why it has such a short duration of action. The carbonic acid esters, carbamylate that catalytic triad site, the esteratic site, as I mentioned, and it takes a lot longer to hydrolyze it. The organophosphates now will phosphorylate at the catalytic triad And this bond is extremely stable. It hydrolyzes really, really slowly. In fact, it's so slow that a new enzyme needs to be synthesized in order to get the enzyme activity back. Now, there's another piece to this that's important. It's called aging, where that phosphate enzyme bond becomes so strong that it's irreversible. That will become important when we talk about the antidote. Now looking at the drugs for Alzheimer's disease, they are reversible cholinesterase inhibitors. They do cross the blood -brain barrier. These two, denepizil and galantamine, are not carbamates. Rivastigmine is a carbamate, so it will act the same way as the carbamic acid esters above. Dinepezil is a non -competitive inhibitor. Galanthamine is a competitive inhibitor. So, dinepezil is the only one with a star. So, what you have to remember here is reversible, non-carbamate, non -competitive, crosses blood-brain barrier. There you go. What do we use them for? Well, I'm going to talk about myasthenia gravis in the next slide and talk about the pathophysiology of it. For now, edrophonium has been used in the diagnosis of myasthenia gravis. It is no longer available, and the reason is because it actually is not a very helpful tool for diagnosing myasthenia gravis. It has poor sensitivity and specificity. And we have better ways to do it now by just detecting autoantibodies against the receptor, the nicotinic receptor in the neuromuscular junction. Neostigmine and pyridostigmine, I'm going to always be talking about together. They are used for virtually the same things, except that pyridostigmine is the only oral one. it is used it is the main one used for myasthenia gravis treatment because of the fact that it's oral neostigmine is used for myasthenia gravis also except it has to be injected they can both be used for reversal of non-depolarizing neuromuscular blockade So I'm going to have to mention what that means here. I talked about the blockade, the depolarizing blockade of nicotinic receptors when we talked about nicotine in the previous lecture. With depolarizing blockade, the ionotropic nicotinic receptor opens initially and then becomes overstimulated with high amounts of nicotine and it will therefore become insensitive and it will not produce an action potential. Non-depolarizing neuromuscular blockers are drugs that are used in surgery to paralyze the skeletal muscles in order to facilitate the surgery. They are competitive inhibitors. Okay, thinking about the fact that non-depolarizing neuromuscular blockers are competitive inhibitors, think about the mechanism of reversal with a cholinesterase inhibitor. Inhibiting the acetylcholinesterase will increase the concentrations of acetylcholine and the synapse, such that acetylcholine can now out-compete the blocking drug and therefore increase the possibility of creating an action potential, an end plate potential, and muscle contractions. That's the concept here with the mechanism for reversal of non -depolarizing neuromuscular blockers, and I will talk more about that when we get to that section of pharmacology at a later date. Pyridostigmine can also be given IV for the reversal of neuromuscular block, and it's the same concept. Now, I draw your attention to this line, neostigmine and pyridostigmine again well we know they are colinesterase inhibitors but they also have another action they are direct nicotinic receptor agonists at the neuromuscular junction and the autonomic ganglia of course so anywhere any place there's the neuronicotinic receptor in the periphery. They would have a direct agonist effect. Phisostigmine is an antidote for anticholinergic toxicity. We're talking about atropine or or gymson weed, or some of these other pure muscarinic receptor antagonists. Pure meaning that they don't have other actions, just muscarinic receptors. Phisostigmine does cross into the CNS, which is where the importance of its use is to manage the life -threatening delirium caused by all of this over-blockade of the muscarinic receptors in the CNS. However, phisostigmine has its own toxicities. It can cause bradycardia. You would expect that because of the increased effects on the M2 receptors in the heart. It can cause respiratory distress, both centrally and its actions at the neuromuscular junction. And it can cause seizures with too rapid administration. So its use is somewhat controversial among some experts. This anticholinergic toxicity can also be managed in the hospital with supportive care. Let's move to malathione. Topical only. It happens to come in a lotion. And it's for head and ***** lice and their eggs. And also for scabies. Scabies is caused by this little arachnid called a mite. The drug has to remain on the skin overnight. And then it gets washed off with soap and water. Echoclopate is just ophthalmic. that's used to reduce intraocular pressure to induce meiosis and it's not used very often. Let's talk about the pathophysiology of myasthenia gravis. This is an autoimmune disease. It is auto antibodies against neuromuscular nicotinic receptors. On the left hand side is the normal looking neuromuscular junction and cholinergic neuron. We see the acetylcholine being introduced into the synapse and we have various receptors that it will bind to produce an end plate potential and skeletal muscle contraction. Looking at the left -hand side, you can see the synapse looks quite a bit different. The autoantibodies will bind to the nicotinic receptors and cross-link. it will draw these autoantibodies will draw complement and the complement will cause lysis of the nicotinic receptors which is going to reduce the number of receptors acetylcholine is still being introduced into the synapse so what is the role then of the cholinesterase inhibitors by blocking acetylcholinesterase then their acetylcholine which is going to continue to be released can accumulate in the synapse, which can increase the probability that acetylcholine will bind to whatever receptors happen to be left, happen to be remaining, and produce a muscle contraction. So now I want to just mention adrophonium because it can still appear on a board exam and it is an important pharmacology concept that we're talking about. We said before that edrophonium is used as a test for diagnosing myasthenia gravis. And the way that is done is to give a little bit of edrophonium, inject a little bit of it, either IV or IM. And that will cause an increase in muscle contraction in the patient with myasthenia gravis. All right, we said that it really is not a very good diagnostic tool. It's not reliable. So let's talk about the difference between myasthenic crisis and cholinergic crisis. Myasthenic crisis means that there's just not enough activation of those neuromuscular nicotinic receptors. And as a result, the patient can develop respiratory failure because of weakness of the respiratory muscles and potentially die. With cholinergic crisis, we get muscle weakness and respiratory failure because of the depolarizing block that's resulting from the excessive amount of stimulation of the nicotinic receptors. So the presentation can appear very similar. I do want to point out that cholinergic crisis occurs very rarely, if at all, in patients who are taking pyridostigmine. And it's not likely that other people are going to be having these cholinesterase inhibitors in order to cause cholinergic crisis. It's mainly the people with myasthenia gravis. So what do we do? Well, by taking a detailed history and a physical exam, then it's possible to diagnose cholinergic crisis. If the patient has been taking a cholinesterase inhibitor like pyridostigmine and the physician discovers that the patient has taken too much, then it's cholinergic crisis. Through the exposure to the cholinesterase inhibitor. Well, let's talk about the test. If a small dose of edrophonium is given, there's going to be a brief block of that acetylcholinesterase, and therefore there will be an increase in the acetylcholine in the synapse. So if this increase in acetylcholine causes an improvement in the muscle weakness, well that must be myasthenia gravis that's causing this respiratory failure. If the muscle weakness does not resolve or gets worse, it's then cholinergic crisis because of excessive amounts of acetylcholine in the synapse or in addition to the drug being available there blocking acetylcholine esterase. So this could, I'm going to say it yet again, still appear on a board exam. You might see it on this exam as a pharmacology concept. I'm not guaranteeing that. So you really should get the concept in mind. A patient who had surgery under general anesthesia facilitated by a non -depolarizing neuromuscular blocker is administered a drug to reverse the neuromuscular blockade. What is the mechanistic rationale for this approach? I'll let you think for a moment. Administration of a carbamate, cholinesterase inhibitor, neostigmine or pyridostigmine, reversibly inhibits acetylcholinesterase, I should say acetylcholinesterase, which increases acetylcholine synaptic levels. And then acetylcholine now outcompetes the neuromuscular blocker, reversing the blockade. A patient diagnosed with myasthenia gravis is given treatment with an oral drug. What is the drug? What is the clinical rationale for this approach? Well, we just talked about that one, so I'm sure you got it right away. Myasthenia gravis is characterized by autoimmune attack on neuromuscular nicotinic receptors, cross-linking them and reducing their numbers. Pyridostigmine inhibits acetylcholinesterase, increasing acetylcholine synaptic levels, which increases the probability of producing an action potential, leading to variable improvement in muscle strength. So what's the clinical rationale? Improvement in muscle strength. Let's talk about toxicity now. Exposure to organophosphates and carbamates. I do want to say that there are carbamate inhibitors nowadays that are used to control insects and weeds and ****** on crops and lawns and in forests, organophosphate insecticides are also still available. So we're talking about acute cholinergic toxicity caused by these products. So let's think about what's going on here. we have high levels of these insecticides in the patient's system. It is blocking acetylcholinesterase basically everywhere. And it's going into the CNS because the drugs are designed to go into the CNS of the insecticides, the insects. so we're going to be having effects on all of the cholinergic neurons cholinergic neurons in the periphery muscarinic and nicotinic both at the neuromuscular junction at the ganglia at the adrenal medulla, the ganglia both is sympathetic and parasympathetic, and in the CNS. So it's getting this widespread effect. So there are toxidromes. Let's begin with dumbbells. there are others, but we'll just do dumbbells, diarrhea, urination, meiosis, bronchoconstriction, bronchorrhea, that's all the mucus, bradycardia, emesis, so vomiting, lacrimation, salivation, sweating. If you prefer, you can put diaphoresis up here with the Ds. So what is a common thread? diarrhea drip, urination drip, bronchorrhea drip, emesis drip, lacrimation drip, salivation drip, sweating drip, drip, drip, drip, plus the bronchoconstriction and the bradycardia. All right, these are muscarinic effects, but it's, yeah, muscarinic effects, right? Now we have nicotinic effects, and it's the days of the week. Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday. Medriasis, tachycardia, weakness, hypertension, fasciculations. Oh no, not CNS. This is ganglia. Medriasis, tachycardia, weakness, hypertension, fasciculations. This looks like all those opposite things are happening. Remember, nicotinic receptors are at the sympathetic ganglia also, so the sympathetic nervous system is activated. And the CNS, central respiratory depression, lethargy, seizures, coma. So muscarinic, we see ganglia, CNS. Death results from respiratory failure. Respiratory failure. What's causing it? Central respiratory depression. Peripheral. Weakness and paralysis of respiratory muscles. And let's not forget what's going on in the lungs. Bronchoconstriction and all of that mucus clogging it up. So all of these features together can lead to death through respiratory failure. This is a figure from UpToDate that puts it into all of the different systems for you. We see acetylcholine as a neurotransmitter all the way through the preganglionic neurons, parasympathetic, sympathetic, somatic, CNS. The ganglia, postganglion. Now sympathetic, see this is sweat here, sympathetic. Epinephrine, this is coming out of the adrenal medulla. and then norepinephrine mainly coming out of the neurons and these are all of the effects somatic the fasciculation that's the jerky jerkiness of the muscles and then finally flaccid paralysis cns all these things that you would expect to see central effects hopefully this little figure will help you. I recommend that you take a piece of paper, a real piece of paper, and a pen or a pencil, and see if you can recreate this chart. If you can, you really, really understand what's going on with the autonomic nervous system and the drug toxicity. These are organophosphates that are available and can cause all of this toxicity. Malathione, I mentioned before, though, is detoxified by us mammals and also birds. Muscarinic, nicotinic, CNS effects, just as we saw. Onset, if it's inhaled, then it's quick. If it has to go through the GI tract, it takes longer. If it has to go through the skin, it takes longer. The duration of the effect is actually going to depend on the compound. How do you diagnose it? Taking a very good history and physical. And also, cholinesterase can be measured in erythrocytes and plasma. How do you manage it? Well, quickly. First and foremost, remove the toxic agent. Remove the patient's clothes if it's on their clothes. Get respiratory and cardiovascular support. Treat seizures. We do have antidotes. Atropine and prolidoxine, which I'm going to go into in the next slide. So atropine. Atropine is an anti -muscarinic. What does that mean? It is a drug that blocks all muscarinic receptors. Given in the high doses that it would be given for this, it will cross into the CNS. It will block the muscarinic receptors in the CNS to protect them from overstimulation by the organophosphate poison. and pralidoxine, which is also called Tupam, which is a cholinesterase regenerator. Pralidoxine is a strong nucleophile. We see that here. And we see they're using the example sarin, which is this organophosphate gas war drug. It has a high affinity for phosphorus. in the organophosphate. Let's go over here. Here's the phosphorus. So prolidoxine, the strong nucleophile, will grab on to the phosphorus and pull it out. You see it here? And that's how the cholinesterase gets regenerated. It's just pulled away that organophosphate away from the cholinesterase. Now this is great as long as it's used early enough to actually break that bond. Once aging occurs that bond becomes so stable that it is absolutely irreversible and the nucleophile will not be able to pull away the phosphate. It has peripheral effects only. It is a strong nucleophile. It's not going to cross into the CNS. So we have atropine on board to block the muscarinic receptors in the CNS and also the periphery to protect them from the effects of acetylcholine, this excessive acetylcholine, due to the organophosphate and it's going to be high doses this is a very serious difficult to treat problem it may take a long time to really prolong treatment of that patient this is a must know the boards love it but besides that it is really clinically important and it's an important pharmacology concept. So I have a picture here of the, it's called the Atena autoinjector. It's got both atropine and praladoxime in there. They're not mixed together because they will interfere with each other. But this autoinjector, let's see, it's going into the lateral thigh here and has to be held down for 10 seconds, is going to introduce both of these drugs intramuscularly. It can be used for the person affected by the toxin. It can be used by that person or by a buddy. It can be given only up to three injections should they be needed. And I recommend that you look for a video that demonstrates this atina. The carbamide organophosphate Alzheimer cholinesterase inhibitors have myriad predictable mechanism -related adverse effects. What systems are involved? All autonomic nervous system functions can be activated because acetylcholinesterase is the neurotransmitter should be acetylcholine is the neurotransmitter at the nicotinic receptors of the ganglia both parasympathetic and sympathetic. The nicotinic receptor at the adrenal medulla which is on the sympathetic side. The nicotinic receptors at the neuromuscular junction and the muscarinic receptors at the effector junctions. Neostigmine and pyridostigmine do not cross the blood -brain barrier. Fisostigmine, denepozil, and the other Alzheimer drugs do cross the blood-brain barrier. So have CNS and peripheral effects, both nicotinic and muscarinic. So now that brings us to the Alzheimer's drugs. What is the goal? The goal really is symptomatic treatment. These drugs do not cure for sure. They do not stop the progression. They're just for the treatment of symptoms. So the rationale here is that the cholinergic neurons project to various cortical areas. Neurons control attention, thinking, processing. They span the forebrain, brainstem, thalamus, and they're responsible for consciousness and attention. So in Alzheimer's dementia, these neurons have defective projections that correlate with these cognitive decline symptoms. The cholinesterase inhibitors enhance synaptic levels of acetylcholine, which should help improve these cognitive symptoms. So I've highlighted dinepazil, since that's the only one that's actually starred. And I put in bold the really important features. Oral, well-absorbed, one-time daily dosing, 100% bioavailability. It really goes through, it's metabolites through the urine and feces mostly. Not much unchanged drugs. So renal dosing is not required. And it's got a decent half-life, which is why the one -time daily dosing. And it's a reversible, non -competitive inhibitor. Those are the takeaways with denepazil. So what about the adverse effects? Well, they are generally well -tolerated by people, which is good. Patients can complain about nausea and anorexia and vomiting and diarrhea. We'd expect these things from these cholinesterase inhibitors. Altered sleep patterns and vivid dreams, they are acting in the CNS. Now, there are some potentially serious ones, and they may require deprescribing. I want to get you familiar with this idea of deprescribing. Patients don't necessarily have to be on drugs forever and ever, And when it is appropriate to remove them, we deprescribe them. And there are different methods for different types of drugs. So some serious adverse effects would be bradycardia. You would expect that hypotension with fainting, syncope, AV block. These are all typical effects of the autonomic nervous system, of parasympathetic. And anorexia, unintentional weight loss. That can be very serious. And most people who have Alzheimer's, not everybody, tend to be older. So, what PK properties of Dinepazil are important in the clinical management of patients with Alzheimer's disease? And then, what are common side effects and what adverse effects may require deprescribing of the drug? So, the PK properties that we think about for managing our patient? Well, oral. It's easy for the patient to take and for the caregiver to administer. There is a once -weekly transdermal option. I just really scraped over that, if preferable, but it's really, really expensive. I'm honestly not sure if it's covered by any insurance. 100% bioavailability. So how is that important? Because it produces reliable blood levels. excreted mainly in the urine, mainly as metabolites. So dosing adjustment for renal insufficiency is not required. It's got this long half -life for once daily dosing. Side effects, nausea, anorexia. So think about the drip, drip, drip. So the vomiting and the diarrhea, nausea, anorexia. Think about the CNS, altered sleep patterns, vivid dreams. and what are the serious effects that would require removal of the drug, withdrawal of the drug. Slow heart rate, hypotension, syncope, AV block, these cardiovascular effects, and the unintentional weight loss. So here's our summary. This tells you everything that we've talked about, and here's a chart that summarizes all of the various uses. So thank you very much. That brings this lecture to a close.