
=== PAGE 1 ===
Pharmacology of Antimuscarinic Agents
(Muscarinic Antagonists)
Leslie Goldstein, Pharm.D.
Associate Professor
Department of Clinical Specialties
Pharmacology Division
Rockefeller Building, Room 204
lgolds01@nyit.edu

=== PAGE 2 ===
I am available to groups and individuals for pharmacology help 
and discussions, including Practice Questions, by appointment.
lgolds01@nyit.edu

=== PAGE 3 ===
Following this session, students will be able to:
1. Structure-activity relationship → Pharmacokinetic properties
Relate the physicochemical properties of the antimuscarinic agents with their pharmacokinetic properties 
(route of administration, absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion). 
2. Mechanism of action → Widespread Effects
Correlate mechanism of action of atropine and “atropine-like” drugs with their effects on the organ systems 
(CNS, eye, heart, vessels, bronchi, gut, genitourinary tract, exocrine glands).
3. Effects → Therapeutic uses
Explain the clinical rationales for antimuscarinic use for each of the following therapeutic appplications:  to 
a) prevent motion sickness; b) reduce respiratory secretions; b) produce mydriasis and cycloplegia; c) treat 
parkinsonism; d) relieve intestinal, biliary, and urinary spasm; and e) reverse the muscarinic toxicity of 
insecticides and nerve agents used in warfare. Give specific examples from the list of starred () drugs.
4. Mechanisms of action → Adverse effects → Contraindications
Relate the mechanisms of the anticholinergic adverse effects with the contraindications for each of the 
starred () drugs (drug-disease interactions).
5. Mechanism of action → Effects of high dose → Toxicity → Specific antidote
Explain the clinical rationale for the use of the specific antidote for anticholingeric overdose by relating its 
actions and effects to the signs and symptoms of the anticholinergic toxicity (anticholinergic toxidrome).
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
Required
•
ScholarRx Bricks  Practice Questions (not graded)
Supplemental resources if you wish to use them (they are not required:
•
Video lecture  Dr. Goldstein’s Word handout  Guided Reading Questions
•
Links to a textbook and pharmacology review books are provided on the next slide.
Preparation Materials
STUDY TIPS: 
•
I provide several learning options with links so your are aware of them.
•
You do not need to study all of them. Use the resources that you like to use for learning. 
•
Work through the GUIDED READING QUESTIONS with pen/pencil and paper. 
Try answering them in your OWN WORDS first without looking at the readings, and then again after 
reviewing.
•
Practice questions are intended to help you integrate and apply pharmacology concepts in the 
context of case vignettes and will help you become familiar with board-style of exam questions.
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
Links to resources
ScholarRx Bricks: 
General Pharmacology > Autonomic Drugs > Drugs that Alter Parasympathetic Tone > Parasympatholytics > 
Antimuscarinic Drugs
Link: https://exchange.scholarrx.com/brick/muscarinic-antagonists
Access Medicine Katzung’s Basic & Clinical Pharmacology, 16e, 2023
Chapter 8: Cholinoceptor-Blocking Drugs & Cholinesterase Regenerators
https://nyit.idm.oclc.org/login?url=https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=3382&sectionid=281747
427
REVIEW BOOKS HAVE PRACTICE QUESTIONS
LWW Health Library, Premium Basic Sciences: Lippincott’s Illustrated Reviews: Pharmacology; 8e, 2023; Chapter 5: 
Cholinergic Antagonists https://nyit.idm.oclc.org/login?url=https://premiumbasicsciences-lwwhealthlibrary-
com/content.aspx?sectionid=253325538&bookid=3222 
Katzung’s Pharmacology: Examination & Board Review, 14e, 2024; Chapter 8: Cholinoceptor-Blocking Drugs & 
Cholinesterase Regenerators
https://nyit.idm.oclc.org/login?url=https://accessmedicine-mhmedical-
com/content.aspx?bookid=3461&sectionid=285590012
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
The following key points are intended help the student grasp the main ideas and 
concepts by organizing and summarizing the “need to know” information. 
Key points may also serve as a concise reference to facilitate review.
6

=== PAGE 7 ===
•
Antimuscarinic agents – muscarinic receptor blocking drugs – resemble acetylcholine 
structurally. An intact tropic acid ester and free -OH group in the acyl portion of the ester are 
essential for activity. 
•
The naturally occurring alkaloids, atropine and scopolamine, are tertiary amines, which are 
readily absorbed from the GI tract and conjunctival membranes, widely distributed including 
the CNS, and metabolized by the liver. 
•
Atropine is administered parenterally; unchanged drug and metabolites are excreted in the 
urine.
•
Scopolamine is available in the US only as a transdermal patch that delivers drug to the 
systemic circulation for 72 hours. Scopolamine is rapidly and fully distributed to the CNS 
where it has greater effects than most other anticholinergic drugs. Synthetic versions are for 
oral use.
•
The quaternary amines are less lipid soluble, charged synthetic compounds. They have 
reduced absorption from the GI tract, more peripheral effects, and are relatively free of CNS 
effects at low doses.
Key points: Structure-activity relationship → Pharmacokinetic properties
7

=== PAGE 8 ===
•
The drugs in this class are competitive antagonists or inverse agonists of acetylcholine at 
muscarinic receptors.
–
Evidence indicates that muscarinic receptors are constitutively active and most drugs that block 
acetylcholine’s actions are inverse agonists that shift the equilibrium to the inactive state of the 
receptor. 
•
Muscarinic receptors are extensively distributed in the periphery (heart, smooth muscle, 
exocrine glands, eyes) and the CNS. mAChRs M1,3,5 are GqPCRs that IP3, DAG and cause 
smooth muscle contraction and stimulate secretions from exocrine gland. mAChRs M2,4 are 
inhibitory Gi/oPCRs that cAMP, K+ channel current.
•
Atropine and scopolamine are nonselective. They have affinity for all 5 subtypes of muscarinic 
receptors, M1-5. Therefore, the drug binds to mAChRs in the intended tissue for the therapeutic 
effect and to mAChRs in “unintended” tissue → side effects.
•
Some synthetic derivatives developed for relief of bladder spasm are somewhat selective for M3 
receptors and are associated with anticholinergic side effects, such as dry mouth, blurred vision, 
constipation, difficulty urinating, and dizziness. 
8
Key points: Mechanism of action → Widespread Effects

=== PAGE 9 ===
•
Antimuscarinic agents have been used in the treatment of a wide variety of clinical conditions 
to inhibit parasympathetic activity in the respiratory tract, urinary tract, GI tract, eye, and heart. 
•
Their CNS applications are the prevention of motion sickness and the management of 
parkinsonian (extrapyramidal) symptoms. 
•
Atropine’s uses are: 
– preanesthesia medication to reduce salivation and excessive respiratory tract secretions
– short-term intervention to prevent persistent bradycardia due to high vagal tone, drug-
induced effect, and high-degree AV block
– prior to reversal of neuromuscular blockade by cholinesterase inhibitors to decrease 
muscarinic effects
– reversal agent (antidote) for cholinesterase poisoning by blocking the muscarinic effects in 
the periphery and CNS. For organophosphate poisoning, atropine is used with a 
cholinesterase regenerator.
•
Scopolamine transdermal is for prevention of motion sickness, prevention of postop 
nausea/vomiting, and sialorrhea associated with neuromuscular disease.
•
Inhaled antimuscarinics are for management of COPD and asthma; ophthalmics induce 
mydriasis and cycloplegia; others are for relief of GI and urinary spasms.
9
Key points: Effects → Therapeutic uses

=== PAGE 10 ===
Key points: Mechanisms of action → Adverse effects → Contraindications
•
Because muscarinic receptors are extensively expressed, the drugs are associated with 
numerous adverse effects: dizziness, somnolence, impaired cognition; blurred vision due to 
mydriasis and cycloplegia; dry mouth, dyspepsia, constipation; tachycardia; urinary hesitancy, 
urinary retention; dry skin and suppression of thermoregulation by inhibiting sweating
•
Antimuscarinic drugs should be avoided in patients with narrow-angle glaucoma, tachycardia, 
GI obstruction, paralytic ileus, severe ulcerative colitis, and prostatic hyperplasia.
•
Antimuscarinic agents can:
– increase intraocular pressure and aggravate narrow-angle glaucoma
– exacerbate tachycardia by blocking vagal action on the sinoatrial node
– aggravate GI obstruction, paralytic ileus, and ulcerative colitis by inhibiting GI motility
– precipitate severe urinary retention in patients with prostatic hyperplasia
•
Infants and young children are especially sensitive to the hyperthermia effects of 
antimuscarinic drugs.
•
In older individuals, antimuscarinic agents may exacerbate or precipitate impaired cognition, 
confusion and psychosis associated with dementia, constipation, urinary retention, cause 
dizziness and drowsiness, and lead to falls.
10

=== PAGE 11 ===
Mechanism of action → Effects of high dose → Toxicity → Specific antidote
•
The signs and symptoms of antimuscarinic overdose are summed up in the anticholinergic 
toxidrome – red as a beet, dry as a bone, blind as a bat, hot as Hades, mad as a hatter, the 
bowel and bladder lose their tone, and the heart runs alone.
•
Toxic doses of atropine and scopolamine cause agitation, delirium, hallucinations, paranoia, 
seizures, coma.
•
Quaternary ammonium muscarinic receptor antagonists can cause skeletal muscle 
weakness in overdose by inhibiting nicotinic receptors in the skeletal muscle junction. 
•
Physostigmine is the reversal agent for severe life-threatening central anticholinergic 
toxicity, if not contraindicated. 
•
Physostigmine must administered carefully. It can cause cholinergic toxicity with 
bradyarrhythmia, asystole, and seizures. 
•
Note: First-generation antihistamines, certain antipsychotic agents, tricyclic antidepressants, 
and others have antimuscarinic effects. Overdoses of these drugs produce syndromes that 
include features of atropine intoxication. Physostigmine should not be administered.
11

=== PAGE 12 ===
12
Muscarinic Receptor Antagonists
Atropa Belladonna
Datura stramonium
(Jimson weed)

=== PAGE 13 ===
Drugs to know by name 
along with their specific pharmacology features
– in addition to the class effects, of course.
13
Tertiary Amines
(cross BBB)
Quaterary Ammoniums
(do not cross BBB)
BBB: blood-brain barrier
Atropine
Ipratropium (SAMA)
SAMA: Short-acting muscarinic antagonist
Scopolamine
 Tiotropium (LAMA)
LAMA: Long-acting muscarinic antagonist
L-Hyoscyamine
Glycopyrrolate
Benztropine
Oxybutynin
Many other antimuscarinic drugs have been synthesized.
Note: L-Hyoscyamine is the levorotary stereoisomer of atropine for oral use.

=== PAGE 14 ===
14
3D structure resembles acetylcholine
Belladonna alkaloids
(Tropane alkaloids)
• Tertiary amine esters 
– Atropine (d,l-hyoscyamine)
– Scopolamine (d,l-hyoscine)
– l(-)-Hyoscyamine
– and synthetic derivatives
• Quaternary ammonium 
antagonists
(synthetic)
– Iprotropium
– Glycopyrrolate
– Methscopolamine
– Several others
Information from the Goodman & Gilman textbook
Structure-activity 
Relationship:
Tropic acid ester 
and free -OH group 
are essential for 
activity.
tropane
tropic acid
Scopolamine
tertiary amine
Acetylcholine
Ipratropium
and
Glycopyrrolate
quaternary ammonium
Atropine
tertiary amine
asymmetric C atom
ipratropium
-O- bridge →
BBB penetration

=== PAGE 15 ===
Pharmacokinetics
15
Tertiary Amines
Quaternary amines
Atropine
Scopolamine
Glycopyrrolate / Ipratropium
A Nonpolar: 
Rapidly and well absorbed from GI tract and mucosal surfaces (all dosage forms)
Polar: 
Poorly and unreliably absorbed
IV, IM, subQ, ophthalmic drops
Transdermal patch is the only form 
available in US
oral, inhalation, injection 
(product specific routes)
D
Widely distributed
Poor penetration of BBB 

Minimal CNS effects at low 
therapeutic doses
Dose-dependent CNS levels 
Scopolamine is rapidly and fully distributed 
into the CNS at therapeutic doses.
M Hepatic, enzymatic hydrolysis
Not available in oral formulations.
Extensive Hepatic first-pass effect
Not available orally for systemic effect.
Product specific
Low bioavailability
E Urine, unchanged drug and metabolites
Minimal excretion in urine
(scopolamine base in transdermal patch)
Urine, unchanged mainly
Feces: unabsorbed drug
t½ Atropine 2-3 hours 
Increased in children <2 yo
and older adults >65 yo
Transdermal Scopolamine base: 9.5 h
(IM, IV 1-4 h for comparison)
Duration (patch): 72 hours
Product specific
Scopolamine is available in Canada and other countries in oral and injectable forms for additional indications.
BBB: blood brain barrier

=== PAGE 16 ===
Upper figure: Lippincott Illustrated Reviews: Pharmacology Figure 5.3
Lower figure: Wikipedia By Boghog - Own work, CC BY-SA 4.0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=34657034
•
Competitive antagonists at muscarinic 
receptors  prevent ACh from binding to 
its receptors the periphery and the CNS
Mechanism of action
16
•
Inverse agonists
Evidence indicates that muscarinic receptors 
are constitutively active, and most drugs that 
block the actions of acetylcholine are inverse 
agonists that shift the equilibrium to the 
inactive state of the receptor.
These include atropine, ipratropium, 
glycopyrrolate, pirenzepine, trihexyphenidyl, 
dicyclomine, and methscopolamine. 

=== PAGE 17 ===
Salivary,
Lacrimal 
glands 
Decrease salivation and tearing → dry mouth and dry eyes 
Sweat glands
Decrease sweating → hot, dry skin → hyperthermia may result
Eyes
Block miosis and accommodation → mydriasis and cycloplegia → blurred vision
Pulmonary
Direct effects:  respiratory secretions
Indirect effects: Block vagal reflex bronchoconstriction by histamine, bradykinin, eicosanoids → 
Allows unopposed beta-adrenergic bronchodilation – a desirable effect
Cardiovascular
Inhibit vagal-mediated effects on M2 receptors:
in SA nodal pacemaker → tachycardia  in AV node → enhance conduction in the AV node
Note: Paradoxical bradycardia (see slide 19)
GI
Inhibit smooth muscle contractions→ inhibits motility→ Delayed gastric emptying / Constipation
Inhibits gastric acid secretion
Urinary
Relax smooth muscle of bladder walls (detrusor muscle) → slows voiding 
Inhibits urethral smooth muscle relaxation → urinary retention
CNS
Euphoria, drowsiness, anterograde amnesia, fatigue, dreamless sleep
17
Responses of Effector Organs to Muscarinic Antagonism

=== PAGE 18 ===
Atropine’s Dose-Related Effects
DOSE
EFFECTS
0.5 mg
Slight cardiac slowing; some dryness of mouth; inhibition of sweating
1 mg
Definite dryness of mouth; thirst; acceleration of heart, sometimes 
preceded by slowing; mild dilation of pupils
2 mg
Rapid heart rate; palpitation; marked dryness of mouth; dilated pupils; 
some blurring of near vision
5 mg
Above symptoms marked; difficulty in speaking and swallowing; 
restlessness and fatigue; headache; dry, hot skin; difficulty in 
micturition; reduced intestinal peristalsis
10 mg
Above symptoms more marked; pulse rapid and weak; iris practically 
obliterated; vision very blurred; skin flushed (“atropine flush”), hot, dry, 
and scarlet; ataxia, restlessness, and excitement; hallucinations and 
delirium; seizures; coma
Please see slide 29 for anticholinergic toxidrome mnemonic
CNS
Sx
Marked
CNS Sx
18
Delirium
Coma

=== PAGE 19 ===
19
Paradoxical Bradycardia
A transient effect of low-dose I.V. atropine
Normally, ACh activation of PREjunctional muscarinic 
autoreceptors may suppress ACh release
Low-dose atropine 
may block this 
inhibitory action
May cause release of ACh, which slows heart rate
Higher atropine doses block 
muscarinic M2 effects on SA node
 
parasympatholytic effects

tachycardia
Paradoxical bradycardia can be avoided with rapid intravenous injection of atropine.

=== PAGE 20 ===
20
Left eye – pharmacologic mydriasis:  
• No response to light and near reflex in the left eye 
• The left pupil remains dilated after instillation of 1% 
pilocarpine in the left eye.
http://www.atlasophthalmology.com/atlas/photo.jsf?node=5820&locale=en

=== PAGE 21 ===
Atropine
• Pre-anesthesia to  salivary and respiratory tract secretions; to prevent bradycardia by some anesthetics
• Prior to administration of neostigmine or pyridostigmine (cholinesterase inhibitor) for reversal of 
neuromuscular blockade to reduce muscarinic side effects
• Cardiovascular: Short-term intervention for persistent bradyarrhythmia due to high vagal tone, drug-
induced, high-degree AV block
• Reversal agent: Cholinergic poisoning to block ACh actions in CNS and periphery
Scopolamine
Available only in transdermal patch in the U.S.
• Motion sickness prevention
• Prevention of post-op nausea/vomiting
• Control of excessive salivation in neuromuscular diseases 
Ipratropium
(SAMA)
Tiotropium
(LAMA)
Others
Oral inhalation → local action on bronchial tissues
• Block parasympathetic constriction of bronchial smooth muscle and reduce secretions
• Management of COPD (chronic bronchitis and emphysema) and asthma
(SAMA for acute relief; LAMA preferred for maintenance)
• Nasal spray for relief of runny nose due to colds
Glycopyrrolate
• Induction of anesthesia and intubation and intraoperative use to block vagally-mediated bradycardia and 
to reduce salivary, tracheobronchial, and GI secretions
• Prior to administration of neostigmine or pyridostigmine to reduce muscarinic side effects
• Reduction of secretions at end of life (death rattle)
• Hyperhidrosis, primary axillary (topical cloth towelette or oral)
21
Therapeutic Uses of Selected Antimuscarinic Agents

=== PAGE 22 ===
22
Therapeutic Uses of Selected Antimuscarinic Agents
Oral products
Oxybutynin
Others
• Antispasmodic for symptomatic treatment of overactive bladder 
• Moderately selective for M3 receptors
• Extensive hepatic metabolism (CYP3A4)
• High incidence of antimuscarinic side effects
L-Hyoscyamine
• Relief of visceral spasms
(other drugs: dicyclomine and Donnatal = belladonna alkaloids with phenobarbital)
Benztropine
Trihexyphenidyl
• Parkinson’s disease: manage tremors due to relative excess of acetylcholine
• Treatment of drug-induced extrapyramidal symptoms (parkinsonism)
Ophthalmic products
Atropine
Homatropine
Cyclopentolate
Tropicamide
Ophthalmic drops to induce mydriasis and cycloplegia
Duration of action:
Atropine ~3 days  Homatropine 12 hours
Cyclopentolate 24 hours  Tropicamide ~6 hours

=== PAGE 23 ===
23
Organ
Comment
Drugs
CNS
Motion sickness prevention
Preanesthesia sedative, anterograde amnesia
Scopolamine
Parkinson disease, EPS: adjunctive agents
Benztropine / Trihexyphenidyl
Cardiac
Counteract reflex bradycardia
Atropine
Respiratory 
tract
Preanesthesia: block secretions
Atropine
Glycopyrrolate
Inhaled bronchodilators for management of COPD and asthma
Ipratropium (short-acting), 
Tiotropium (long-acting),
several other long-acting drugs
GI tract
Antispasmodic
L-Hyoscyamine / Dicyclomine
Donnatal (belladonna / phenobarbital)
Urinary 
bladder
Overactive bladder antispasmodic
Oxybutynin
Several others
Eyes
Mydriasis and cycloplegia for examination of optic disc and 
retina 
Tropicamide
Cyclopentolate
Reversal
agent
Carbamate / organophosphate cholinesterase inhibitor toxicity
Blocks muscarinic receptors in CNS and periphery 
(used with pralidoxime for organophosphate poisoning)
ATROPINE
Summary of Therapeutic Uses by Organ System

=== PAGE 24 ===
24
Adverse Effects Resulting from Muscarinic Blockade
(not a complete list)
Muscarinic 
blockade 
causes:
CNS effects
Dizziness 
Cognitive impairment
Delirium
Scopolamine causes 
CNS effects at 
therapeutic doses
Xerostomia
Blurred vision 
Thick respiratory 
secretions, plugging
Systemic drugs
Inhaled antimuscarinics 
do not cause it.
Dyspepsia
Constipation
Urinary retention
Hot, dry skin 
by suppression of 
thermoregulation
FDA Warning: Transderm Scopolamine
Hyperthermia resulting in hospitalization has 
occurred in children <17 and adults 60 years old.

=== PAGE 25 ===
25
Narrow-angle glaucoma
Pupil dilation (mydriasis) may block the filtration angle, which may 
block outflow of aqueous humor through trabecular meshwork and 
canal of Schlemm, leading to increased intraocular pressure
Prostatic hyperplasia
Aggravate or precipitate urinary retention
Cardiovascular disease
Tachycardia can precipitate ischemic attack, myocardial infarction, or 
arrhythmia
Gastrointestinal obstruction
Paralytic ileus
Severe ulcerative colitis
Inhibition of GI motility can aggravate these conditions.
Contraindications* for Use of Atropine-Like Agents
*Atropine is not contraindicated in cases of organophosphate toxicity.

=== PAGE 26 ===
TOXIC SYNDROME
•
pulse rapid and weak
•
iris practically obliterated; vision 
very blurred
•
skin flushed, hot, dry, and scarlet
•
ataxia, restlessness, and 
excitement
•
hallucinations and delirium
•
seizures, coma
The anticholinergic toxidrome 
mnemonic is on the next slides.
REVERSAL: Physostigmine
•
Respiratory, CV support, seizure treatment 
(benzodiazepine)
Use of physostigmine is controversial.
•
Most patients with anticholinergic toxicity do well on 
supportive therapy alone.
•
Contraindication: Overdose by tricyclic 
antidepressants (TCA), phenothiazine derivatives, 
1st-gen antihistamines, and other drugs with 
“atropine-like” effects have a wide range of effects, 
including cardiac toxicity. Physostigmine can 
exacerbate them and lead to severe complications.
Toxicity: Antimuscarinic Drugs
26
Physostigmine must be administered very cautiously. 
Rapid administration can cause symptoms of cholinergic excess and cholinergic toxicity, 
•
bradyarrhythmia / asystole / seizures / respiratory depression

=== PAGE 27 ===
27
Mnemonic: Anticholinergic Toxidrome
Red as a beet
flushed (scarlet), hot skin (“atropine flush”)
Dry as a bone
dry mouth; dry skin; reduced GI secretions
Blind as a bat
large, nonreactive pupils; blurred vision
Hot as Hades
hyperthermia; tachycardia; hypertension 
(“atropine fever”)
Mad as a hatter
confusion, disorientation, hallucinations, seizures, coma
The bowel and bladder 
lose their tone
effects on smooth muscle and secretions → absent bowel 
sounds and urinary retention
And the heart runs alone
tachycardia; weak, rapid pulse

=== PAGE 28 ===
28
Red as a Beet
“atropine flush” 
due to hyperthermia
Dry as a Bone
secretions inhibited
Blind as a Bat
mydriasis, cycloplegia
Hot as a Hades
hyperthermia; tachycardia; hypertension
Mad as a Hatter
In olden days, hatters breathed mercury
fumes from the felt used in hat making.

=== PAGE 29 ===
29
Infants and young children: Especially susceptible to the hyperthermic 
effects and other toxic effects of muscarinic antagonists 
Elderly: Susceptible to both peripheral and CNS effects, which may 
exacerbate or precipitate many conditions, including impaired cognition, 
confusion and psychosis associated with dementia, and lead to falls.
➢Drugs with anticholinergic effects should be avoided in older 
individuals. The side effects of the drugs outweigh the benefits.
Special Populations
Pregnancy: If there is a clear indication for use, medications used as 
antidotes (atropine) should not be withheld because of fears of teratogenicity.

=== PAGE 30 ===
Check your knowledge
A hospitalized patient is diagnosed with symptomatic sinus bradycardia. What drug can be 
administered?
•
Atropine blocks vagal effects that normally slow the heart rate, which allows unopposed 
sympathetic nervous system stimulation, resulting in increased heart rate and improved 
conduction through the AV node. 
The drug is administered by rapid IV push to avoid a specific adverse effect. What is the adverse 
effect and the proposed mechanism?
•
Paradoxical bradycardia. The initial low concentration of atropine from a slow intravenous 
injection may initially block inhibitory presynaptic receptors, causing ACh release, thus, slowing 
of the heart rate. Rapid IV administration avoids this effect. 
Janny is a 38-year-old woman prone to carsickness. She places a small patch that looks like a 
round Band-Aid behind her ear the day before she and a companion are leaving for a road trip 
across the country. What is the drug? Other than convenience, what is an advantage of this route 
of administration?
•
Trandermal scopolamine bypasses first-pass metabolism and maintains steady, consistent 
blood levels and avoids peaks and troughs. Avoiding high peak concentrations may reduce 
dizziness and drowsiness and other side effects.
30

=== PAGE 31 ===
Check your knowledge
An otherwise healthy 77-year-old female presents to the family practice clinic with signs and 
symptoms of a respiratory infection that would likely respond to a macrolide antibiotic. The patient 
takes oxybutynin for urinary incontinence due to bladder spasms. Which macrolide antibiotics could 
lead to an increase in the antimuscarinic side effects of oxybutynin? (Hint: PK mechanism)
•
Erythromycin and clarithromycin are strong (potent) CYP3A4 inhibitors. Oxybutynin is 
metabolized by CYP3A4 and is associated with a constellation of antimuscarinic side effects.
A 62-year-old male smoker diagnosed with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is given 
prescriptions for a long-acting antimuscarinic drug (LAMA) and a short-acting beta agonist (SABA) 
and guidance on smoking cessation. What are the drugs and how will the patient take them?
•
The drugs are the LAMA, tiotropium or other long-acting drug for maintenance bronchodilation 
by blocking cholinergic bronchoconstriction, and the SABA, albuterol for direct stimulation of 
beta-2 receptors, which causes bronchial smooth muscle relaxation and bronchodilation. You 
will learn about SABAs and LABAs in the Sympathomimetics lectures.
31

=== PAGE 32 ===
Check your knowledge
A 30-year-old female presents to the ED with confusion; delirium; hot, flushed, dry skin; dilated 
pupils; tachycardia; hypotension; conduction anomalies; and absent bowel sounds. She has a 
seizure while in the ED. Her roommate shows the health care team an empty prescription vial 
labeled amitriptylline 50 mg daily and dated yesterday. (Amitriptyline is a tricyclic antidepressant). 
Why should the reversal agent for antimuscarinic toxicity be avoided in this patient?
•
Overdose by tricyclic antidepressants (TCA), phenothiazine derivatives, and other drugs with 
anticholinergic actions have a wide range of effects, including cardiac toxicity. Physostigmine 
can exacerbate them and lead to severe complications.
A 20-year-old pregnant female agricultural worker is brought to the emergency room with 
confusion and other signs and symptoms of cholinergic toxicity consistent with poisoning by 
insecticides. Her coworker reports that carbamate, not organophosphate, insecticides are used. 
She is treated with decontamination, respiratory, and cardiovascular support. What is the reversal 
agent and should it be administered to this patient?
•
The reversal agent is atropine. Pralidoxime is not indicated because it is not effective for 
poisoning by carbamate insecticides. Yes, atropine should be administered because it is life-
saving and the benefit far outweighs any risk to the fetus.
32

=== PAGE 33 ===
33
Summary of Antimuscarinic Drugs

=== PAGE 34 ===
•
Anticholinergic agents block the actions of acetylcholine at the receptors.
•
Atropine and scopolamine are antimuscarinic tertiary amines that are readily 
absorbed and penetrate the CNS. Synthetic quaternary amines are poorly absorbed 
and have low CNS effects.
•
Atropine and scopolamine nonspecifically block all types of muscarinic receptors 
(M1-M5). Some agents are somewhat selective. 
•
Antimuscarinic drugs have many physiologic effects on circulation, respiration, 
alertness, vision, GI and urinary function.
•
Therapeutic uses include with induction of anesthesia and intubation to prevent 
bradycardia and inhibit salivation and respiratory secretions; motion sickness 
prophylaxis; COPD and asthma; GI spasms; overactive bladder; tremors of 
Parkinson’s disease; induction of mydriasis; and sialorrhea.
•
Atropine is the reversal agent for cholinergic poisoning. 
•
Physostigmine is the reversal agent for atropine poisoning.
34

=== PAGE 35 ===
•
Adverse effects reflect blockade of cholinergic effects: dry mucous membranes 
and dry skin, blurred vision, urinary retention and constipation, tachycardia, 
dizziness, somnolence, impaired cognition, and hyperthermia.
•
Young children are particularly susceptible to hyperthermia. 
•
Elderly patients are sensitive to the peripheral and CNS adverse effects, which 
can aggravate constipation and urinary retention, cause confusion and 
psychosis, and dizziness and somnolence, and lead to falls. 
➢Drugs with anticholinergic effects should be avoided in the older patient.
•
Anticholinergics are contraindicated in patients with narrow-angle glaucoma, 
prostatic hyperplasia, tachycardia, GI obstruction, paralytic ileus, or severe 
ulcerative colitis.
35

=== PAGE 36 ===
Check your knowledge
A hospitalized patient is diagnosed with symptomatic sinus bradycardia. What drug can be 
administered?
•
Atropine blocks vagal effects that normally slow the heart rate, which allows unopposed 
sympathetic nervous system stimulation, resulting in increased heart rate and improved 
conduction through the AV node. 
The drug is administered by rapid IV push to avoid a specific adverse effect of the drug. What is 
the adverse effect and the proposed mechanism?
•
Paradoxical bradycardia. The initial low concentration of atropine from a slow intravenous 
injection may initially block inhibitory presynaptic receptors, causing ACh release, thus, slowing 
of the heart rate. Rapid IV administration avoids this effect. 
Janny is a 38-year-old woman prone to carsickness. She places a small patch that looks like a 
round Band-Aid behind her ear the day before she and a companion are leaving for a road trip 
across the country. What is the drug? Other than convenience, what is an advantage of this route 
of administration?
•
Trandermal scopolamine bypasses first-pass metabolism and maintains steady, consistent 
blood levels and avoids peaks and troughs. Avoiding high peak concentrations may reduce 
dizziness and drowsiness and other side effects.
36

=== PAGE 37 ===
Check your knowledge
An otherwise healthy 77-year-old female presents to the family practice clinic with signs and 
symptoms of a respiratory infection that would likely respond to a macrolide antibiotic. The patient 
takes oxybutynin for urinary incontinence due to bladder spasms. Which macrolide antibiotics could 
lead to an increase in the antimuscarinic side effects of oxybutynin?
•
Erythromycin and clarithromycin are strong (potent) CYP3A4 inhibitors. Oxybutynin is 
metabolized by CYP3A4 and is associated with a constellation of antimuscarinic side effects.
A 62-year-old male smoker diagnosed with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is given 
prescriptions for a long-acting antimuscarinic drug (LAMA) and a short-acting beta agonist (SABA) 
and guidance on smoking cessation. What are the drugs and how will the patient take them?
•
The drugs are the LAMA, tiotropium or other long-acting drug for maintenance bronchodilation 
by blocking cholinergic bronchoconstriction, and the SABA, albuterol for direct stimulation of 
beta-2 receptors, which causes bronchial smooth muscle relaxation and bronchodilation. You 
will learn about SABAs and LABAs in the Sympathomimetics lectures.
37

=== PAGE 38 ===
Check your knowledge
A 30-year-old female presents to the ED with confusion; delirium; hot, flushed, dry skin; dilated 
pupils; tachycardia; hypertension; conduction anomalies; and absent bowel sounds. She has a 
seizure while in the ED. Her roommate shows the health care team an empty prescription vial 
labeled amitriptylline 50 mg daily and dated yesterday. (Amitriptyline is a tricyclic antidepressant). 
Why should the reversal agent for antimuscarinic toxicity be avoided in this patient?
•
Overdose by tricyclic antidepressants (TCA), phenothiazine derivatives, and other drugs with 
anticholinergic actions have a wide range of effects, including cardiac toxicity. Physostigmine 
can exacerbate them and lead to severe complications.
A 20-year-old pregnant female agricultural worker is brought to the emergency room with confusion 
and other signs and symptoms of cholinergic toxicity consistent with poisoning by insecticides. Her 
coworker reports that carbamate, not organophosphate, insecticides are used. She is treated with 
decontamination, respiratory, and cardiovascular support. What is the reversal agent and should it 
be administered to this patient?
•
The reversal agent is atropine. Pralidoxime is not indicated because it is not effective for 
poisoning by carbamate insecticides. Yes, atropine should be administered because it is life-
saving and the benefit far outweighs any risk to the fetus.
38

=== PAGE 39 ===
References
•
Access Medicine Goodman and Gilman’s The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics 14e, 
2022; Chapter 11: Muscarinic Receptor Agonists and Antagonists
•
Access Medicine Katzung’s Basic & Clinical Pharmacology, 16e, 2024; Chapter 8: 
Cholinoceptor Blocking Drugs
•
UpToDate Lexidrug: various drug monographs
39

=== PAGE 40 ===
Lecture Feedback Form:
https://comresearchdata.nyit.edu/redcap/surveys/?s=HRCY448FWYXREL4R 
40
