Welcome to the Pharmacology of the Anti -Muscarinic Agents. These drugs occupy and block the muscarinic receptors of the parasympathetic nervous system. They are therefore muscarinic antagonists. Dr. Goldstein speaking. Please contact me if you'd like to chat about pharmacology. And I'm happy to help you with the practice questions as well. just send me an email and we will set up a mutually convenient appointment. Here are the learning objectives. I have labeled them to help you see what the point of them is. All questions that I write, all content here, will apply to these learning objectives. Mechanisms, Mechanisms. Mechanisms. Structure activity relationship determines mechanisms and effects. Mechanisms of action. Mechanisms of adverse effects. Mechanisms of drug -drug interactions. Mechanisms determine the effects, which determine the therapeutic uses, which is the whole point of pharmacology. We need to make sure we understand what's going on with adverse effects so we can optimize therapy for our individual patient and also know who should not get it. Here are the preparation materials. I highly recommend the practice questions. In fact, I put them under the required section. The practice questions will help you self-assess whether or not you know and will help you to apply the concepts. So I encourage you strongly to do them on your own. The answers can be found in the notes handout. Just do a search. Here are the links, including ScholarRx Brick's link, which you may find very helpful. And I'm supplying some key points as usual. You can use these as an introduction to the lecture if you wish, as review, however you wish to use it. I'm not going to read it to you. You can read very well yourselves. And that brings us to the pharmacology of the muscarinic receptor antagonists. The originals, atropine and scopolamine, come from plant sources. Atropa belladonna on the left, which is also known as deadly nightshade. These berries in particular look quite inviting, don't they? But they are poisonous. And we have gymson weed on the right-hand side that also contains the belladonna alkaloids. Here are the drugs that you should know by name. We have our tertiary amines that cross the blood -brain barrier, atropine, scopolamine, L -hyosiamine, benztropine, and oxybutynin. L-hyosiamine is actually the levorotary stereoisomer of atropine, which is why I put a star on it. Atropine comes in nature and also in in pharmaceutics as a mixture of the dextro and levo stereoisomers. So the L-hyosimine is just the levo. It is the levo form that has activity. The dextro form does not have activity. Then we have our quaternary amines or quaternary ammonium compounds that are charged. Quaternary 4, tertiary 3. Three bonds, four bonds. Quaternary ammoniums are charged and therefore do not cross the blood-brain barrier. And I'm asking you to remember these three because they're widely used in therapy, and they demonstrate the principle very well. So, structure-activity relationship. Why do we learn about that? Well, you might be tested on the boards, but that's not the reason. It's because it is the structure that determines how active and what activity a drug is going to have. In this case, the drug needs to fit into the muscarinic receptor active site and it needs to block the agonist from being able to bind. So structure activity relationship. What's needed for this group of drugs needs to have a tropane component. We see that here, here, and it needs to have a tropic acid. So we see that here, here, and on these other compounds as well. So, the tertiary amines, atropine, scopolamine, L-hyosiamine, synthetic derivatives, I'm not even going to mention, put acetylcholine at the top, so possibly you can visualize how the structures seem similar to acetylcholine. Acetylcholine fits beautifully into the site of muscarinic receptors, of course, it's the neurotransmitter. But the others will fit, but block acetylcholine from activating the receptors. Here we see our charge on the quaternary ammonium compounds. Let's take a look at pharmacokinetics now. Now, pharmacokinetics matter because we need to know how we're getting the drug into the patient, where the patient, where the drug is distributing to. Is it going to get where it needs to go? How is it metabolized? Is it going to, the metabolism can determine the bioavailability and it determines how we're getting the drug out of the body along with the excretion. Does it go out through the kidneys as unchanged drug? Does it go out as metabolites mainly? That's going to determine whether or not you need to do renal dosing. And of course, we want to know the half-life so we can have some kind of idea of the duration of action of the drug in the body. That's basic fundamental pharmacology. So atropine and scopolamine, tertiary amines, rapidly and well-absorbed from the GI mucosal surfaces. They, however, are not given ****** any longer in this country. They're given parenterally. Atropine is in ophthalmic drops, and so is scopolamine, but I didn't indicate that here. The main thing that we want to remember with scopolamine is that it is in a transdermal patch. Now think back to when we were remembering, I asked you to memorize about absorption, various modes of absorption of drugs. Transdermal patch is a patch that's placed on the skin and the drug will pass from the patch through the skin into the bloodstream. and that's how it reaches systemic levels. To pass through the skin, it needs to be lipophilic. And we know scopolamine is quite lipophilic. And therefore, it's very suitable for a transdermal patch. Furthermore, the patch releases the drug slowly, slowly, slowly over time so that the blood levels are quite even. quite even over time, so we don't get these peaks and troughs that we would get from an oral formulation. Widely distributed, so they're passing through all of these various barriers and going to all different kinds of tissues in the body, including the CNS. There is extensive hepatic first pass effect, particularly of scopolamine, which has pretty low oral bioavailability. And atropine, a little better bioavailability, also hepatic metabolism. Atropine does exit through the urine as unchanged drug. However, scopolamine has minimal excretion in the urine. Two differences. Easier to remember of a class, what are the class effects, and how do the different drugs reflect those class effects. That way, that makes learning a lot smaller. Atropine, pretty short half-life. Transderm scope, pretty long, about 10 hours. And remember, this is released slowly, gradually, over time, and therefore, the duration of the patch is actually 72 hours because that patch has a depot amount of scopolamine in it to allow enough drug to be released into the bloodstream over that three-day period. it. It's not given IM or IV in this country, but I've given you the half-life of IM or 2-IV, which is about up to four hours, but one to four hours as a comparison. Now let's take a look at the quaternary amines, glycopyrrolate and epitropium. Two synthetic quaternary amines, different therapeutic uses, which we'll get to when we are there. So they are polar, so of course you understand by now that they really have poor absorption across membranes. Now, that said, glycopyrrolate happens to be oral. Well, how does that make sense? Well, there's some absorption, not very much, and they dose it so that enough of the drug gets into the bloodstream. They're also Ipertropium and glycopyrrolate are given by inhalation and glycopyrrolate also by injection. We'll see how that matters when we get to the therapeutic uses. They do not cross the blood-brain barrier. Low bioavailability I said, mainly unchanged drug in the urine, some unabsorbed drug. If we see an oral drug with poor absorption, where is it going to go? It's not being absorbed, it's just going to go out the way it came in. Well, not exactly the way it came out. It's going to go out the other end. And their half -lives did depend actually on the specific product. Basic pharmacokinetic principles. All right, mechanisms. So since the beginning of pharmacology understanding, modern pharmacology understanding, they've been categorized as competitive antagonists at muscarinic receptors. This picture right here, here's our acetylcholine. It would normally occupy this spot, activate the muscarinic receptor. But atropine and scopolamine, according to this cartoon, fit right in there. Acetylcholine can't get in. Of course, these are reversible, competitive antagonists. They can be out-competed if acetylcholine levels are high enough. By the same token, if the, let's say, atropine levels are high enough, they can out-compete acetylcholine, and we'll see why that matters. Now, more recently, in the pharmacology learning, according to what the investigators are finding, many of them have been identified as inverse agonists. so I'm sure you remember inverse agonist I put this chart here to help you visualize it again the inverse agonist will bind to the active site and will has affinity only for the active site as an antagonist and will reduce the basal effect I want you to just basically remember those two two different concepts. These include atropine, apretropium, glycopyrrolate, a whole bunch of them. So it's easier to group it, remember the group, than to remember the individual names. I do not have stars on these. So you don't have to remember those by name at this point. okay so if we give the drug what response do we expect to see well the first way to be able to predict the response of an antagonist is to think about what does the agonist do so thinking about the cholinomimetics we think about the effects on the heart and we think about drip drip drip Correct? So the antagonists are going to do the opposite. Dry, dry, dry. Salivary and lacrimal glands decrease elevation and tearing. Dry mouth, dry eyes. Only makes sense. Correct? Sweat glands. It's going to block sweating. Decrease sweating. What's going to happen when we decrease sweating? We get hot dry skin. Sweating is one of our thermoregulatory mechanisms. It helps us cool off. So these drugs are going to block that cooling off mechanism and as a result hyperthermia may result. So who is at the highest risk? Children. Also older individuals. eyes what normally happens well meiosis and accommodation to near vision we're blocking that we're blocking meiosis what's going to happen we're going to get the sympathetic effect unopposed and so it's going to cause increased size of the pupil medriasis and it's going to prevent the lens from shaping into the accommodating shape and so we get cycloplegia, that's called. Unable to focus on near things, near vision. What happens? Blurred vision. What's happening in the lungs? Well, drip, drip, drip, it's going to decrease the respiratory secretions, but also it's going to block bronchoconstriction by histamine, bradykinin, nycocinoids, all those things. and it will allow unopposed beta -adrenergic bronchodilation. And this is a key mechanism that we will talk about more later on in this lecture. It's a desirable effect. Cardiovascular. Well, if we activate M2 receptors in the heart, that will slow the heart rate. So what happens when we block them? We get an increase in the heart rate, tachycardia even. In the AV node, we get enhanced conduction in the AV node. Oh, so what is this thing below here? Paradoxical bradycardia. How in the world does that happen? Well, we're going to talk about that. And that is something that this concept is something you really need to know. It's clinically important, and they like to test it on the boards. What's happening in the gastrointestinal system? Well, drip, drip, drip is what happens when we activate acetylcholine receptors in the gut. We get the opposite with these drugs. So we're going to inhibit smooth muscle contractions, so inhibit motility. Remember, rest and digest, that's the cholinomimatic effect. So we're blocking that. We get delayed gastric emptying, constipation, and inhibition of gastric secretion. So all the opposite things from what acetylcholine does. Urinary tract, relaxing smooth muscle of the bladder wall. So that's called the detrusor muscle. And that will slow voiding, possibly interrupt voiding, possibly cause urinary retention. It inhibits the urethral smooth muscle relaxation, and that's going to contribute to urinary retention as well. In the CNS, for those that cross the blood -brain barrier, like atropine and scopolamine, euphoria, drowsiness, antero-grade amnesia, so forgetting amnesia being forgetting anything that happened after the drug hit the CNS, fatigue and dreamless sleep. Euphoria, ***** potential of these drugs, especially start thinking about the plants, gymson weed, for example. Okay, dose-related effects of atropine. dose related effects is an essential concept to understand with all drugs but with atropine in particular and this is really a good example of what happens when drug drug doses are increased at low doses of atropine there's going to be a little cardiac slowing slowing so this is the paradoxical bradycardia which is an undesirable thing cardiac slowing with that low dose get some dryness of the mouth inhibition of sweating those are seen fairly early we can see with the low dose double the dose to one milligram more dry mouths patient feels thirsty because the mouth is so dry heart rate increases so now we're starting to see we're moving towards tachycardia mild dilation mild dilation of the pupils double the dose again now the heart is really pounding pump pump pump pump that's what palpitations are the patient can actually feel that heart pounding. Mouth is really dry. Pupils are dilated. And as a result, there's some cycloplegia and blurred vision. Now, much bigger dose, five milligrams, more than double. Really get marked symptoms. Heart. Heart is pounding away. Mouth is really dry. Pupils are dilated. Vision is blurred. Patient is starting to slur a little bit, difficulty speaking, hard to swallow, feeling restless and tired, fatigued, headache. Now we have this hot, dry skin, difficulty in urinating, and the intestinal peristalsis is starting to slow down. This is a really big dose, 10 milligrams or more. We like to avoid that if necessary, if possible. Sometimes it's necessary, though. Really marked symptoms. Pulse is just flying away. Iris is practically obliterated by that large pupil. Very blurry vision. Skin is flushed now. And this is called atropine flush. Something you should not forget. This term you should not forget. Why is the skin flushed? Because the body is doing what it can to try and cool down, which means capillaries at the surface of the skin are opening up. And so that makes the skin look flushed. hot dry scarlet skin that's why it's called atropine flush difficulty walking in a straight line restless excited now there are hallucinations delirium seizures and coma you see dose dependent effects to very serious effects toxic effects and we'll get back to this concept with our anticholinergic toxidrome. Let's talk about the paradoxical bradycardia for a moment. This is a transient effect. It's very brief, but it can be clinically important. This happens with the low -dose IV atropine I mentioned before. so normally we know that acetylcholine will activate the m2 receptors and cause bradycardia well with this low dose this is the theory actually the atropine may block the inhibitory action and as a result that will cause a release of acetylcholine and that will slow the heart rate now the higher doses will block the m2 effects on the sa node and parasympathetic effects that will cause tachycardia so how is this mitigated how do we mitigate this initial paradoxical bradycardia if we're giving this to a patient with bradycardia we don't want to make it worse usually we don't give drugs by rapid IV injection but if this if the appropriate dose is given by a rapid intravenous injection by people who are trained in this then that can bypass this transient bradycardic effect so I have some pictures here what it might look like in the left eye. See this pupil is much larger here than this pupil and it remains dilated after installation of 1% pylacarpine in the left eye. So pylacarpine is the cholinomimetic but its effects blocked. And because the atropine is there, and therefore the pupil will not shrink in size. All right, let's talk about therapeutic uses. What are we using these drugs for? Atropine pre-anesthesia. So when anesthesia is administered, that can stimulate the salivary and respiratory tract secretions and also can cause some bradycardia. So by giving a dose of atropine, that can prevent all of these salivary and respiratory secretions and also prevent the bradycardia. We'll be talking about these drugs, neostigmine and pyridostigmine, which are called cholinesterase inhibitors in, oh, we've talked about it already, no, in the next lecture, excuse me. Prior to administration of these two drugs to reverse, which can reverse the muscarinic side effects of those drugs, so they're cholinesterase inhibitors, so they're cholinomimetics, it's true, we did talk about it already, which will cause the the acetylcholine effects so by giving atropine that's going to block those this is patient specific this is procedure specific this is physician practitioner specific i'm just giving you generalizations so cardiovascular short-term intervention for persistent bradyarrhythmia due to high vagal tone. It makes sense if the bradyarrhythmia is due to high vagal tone and atropine will act on muscarinic receptors on on the vagus nerve. It makes sense to use it. Reversal agent, cholinergic poisoning to block the effects of acetylcholine actions in the CNS so that's going to need the big bigger dose and the periphery scopolamine is only available in the transdermal patch as I mentioned before there's a picture of it it's this dot right here dot looks like a band -aid to me anyway to prevent motion sickness so it acts scopolamine acts on muscarinic receptors in the vestibular system. It will block the effect of acetylcholine there, and that really helps with motion sickness prevention. Once the motion sickness is active and the person is vomiting, it's a little too late. So we use it for prevention. Also prevention of post-op nausea and vomiting, control of excessive salivation and neuromuscular diseases. So it does have its place in therapy. Now, I mentioned the quaternary ammonium compounds, istrotropium, tiotropium, and glycopyrrolate. We'll look at ipratropium and tiotropium first. These are available only by oral inhalation. And it's in nebulizer, but I've given you a metered dose inhaler picture here. so it's sprayed into the mouth and breathed into the lungs so that it acts locally on bronchial tissues and by doing it this way there can be a large concentration of the drug in the bronchial tissues where it can act on bronchial smooth muscle it has very poor absorption into the bloodstream so we avoid the systemic adverse effects that we would normally have if we gave it systemically. Sama is a short -acting muscarinic antagonist. Lama is a long-acting muscarinic antagonist, which is why I put a star on both of those. But you notice that it says tropium on the end. It's going to be an anti-muscarinic agent that's used for oral inhalation. So basically, what is it doing? It's just blocking the muscarinic receptors on bronchial smooth muscle. So it's preventing atropine from causing constriction of that smooth muscle. And it's also acting on the mucus receptors. But the main point of these drugs is constriction of the bronchial smooth muscle. Four, management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease like chronic bronchitis emphysema and for asthma. They're usually not used alone. We'll talk more about that later on. And ipratropium also comes in a nasal spray, so intranasal use for a runny nose. Glycopyrrolate now. This one is used like atropine, but it does not cross the blood-brain barrier. I'll just put BBB and an X through it. Does not cross the blood -brain barrier, therefore is not likely to cause the CNS adverse effects. So it can be used for induction of anesthesia and intubation, intraoperative use for the blocking the vaguely mediated bradycardia, reduces salivary and bronchial secretions, GI secretions. So same uses, just with the extra advantage of not crossing the blood-brain barrier. There's one little extra here, comes in these topical forms and also ******, remember, Oral has still got very low bioavailability. It's actually about 3%. But they dose it in such a way to achieve adequate systemic levels. Hyperhidrosis is excessive sweating. Well, now we have some other ones here that I mentioned in the beginning. Oxybutanin is an antispasmodic for the symptomatic relief of overactive bladder. And this is something that usually happens to older women, mainly, not only. It's moderately selective for M3 receptors, which is good. That's what we're targeting on an overactive bladder, on bladder tissue. It's still only moderately selective. It's going to be kind of a dose-dependent issue. Excessive hepatic metabolism. Here we have our CYP3A4. Remember, CYP3A4 has approximately 50 % of the CYP-Pi in terms of the drugs that it will inactivate, or I should say will metabolize. oxybutynin does have a high incidence of anti-muscarinic side effects well yeah that's what we expect here's our l-hyothiamine some some of you may know it as lebsin and it is really used for visceral spasms belly spasms there are a couple of others that are used i've indicated them here. I don't have stars on them though. Benztropine and triaxifenadol, Parkinson's disease to manage the tremors. You'll learn about Parkinson's disease in later lectures and I'll leave it at that. Ophthalmic products, atropine, homoatropine, cyclopentylate, tropicamide, they all do the same thing. The only difference is their duration of action. that cause medriasis and cycloplegia. And so they're used by ophthalmologists for various reasons. Here's a summary of the therapeutic uses by organ system. As physicians, as healthcare professionals, We tend to think about drug use according to what the patient presents with, so organ systems. And I'm not going to go through this. This is just rehashing what we talked about, but in a different context. Adverse effects resulting from muscarinic blockade. I put it in this little flow chart. Muscarinic blockade causes CNS effects if they cross the blood-brain barrier. And what are those CNS effects? Dizziness, cognitive impairment like confusion, delirium, and scopolamine specifically causes CNS effects at therapeutic doses. Remember we talked about atropine, where the lower doses really do not have much effect on CNS systems. But it certainly does at the higher doses. Well, scopolamine has CNS effects as therapeutic doses. Why? Well, it's structure, number one. So why do we use it as for motion sickness? So it's got to get into the CNS in order to work to prevent vomiting. they cause thick respiratory secretions and plugging the systemic drugs the inhaled ones don't seem to cause that important difference they cause they decrease motility of the gut motility of the GI system and hot, dry skin by suppression of thermoregulation. There is an FDA warning on transdermal scope about hyperthermia resulting in hospitalization that has occurred in young people, children and adolescents, and those older adults. It is a FDA warning. It's called black box warning and that's just what people call it. Contraindications. Well first of all let me say atropine is not contraindicated in anybody in cases of organophosphate toxicity because that is life -threatening, and atropine is needed. So let's get back to the contraindications. Narrow-angle glaucoma. What's happening? We use the drug. It causes that pupil to really dilate, and that may block the filtration angle. Oops, I'm going to make a very bad eye here, and here's the nose, and this is the angle we're talking about where the canal of Schlem is, and if we have a very big pupil, that's going to close off this spot, and that can increase the intraocular pressure. Prostatic hyperplasia can aggravate or even precipitate urinary retention. What are we thinking about here? Somebody goes in for some kind of surgery is given atropine to prevent the secretions, prevent aspiration of those secretions, and after the surgery comes out with urinary retention, which means a leg bag might be necessary. A catheter and a leg bag. Cardiovascular disease, tachycardia. Okay, tachycardia, what's happening there? The heart is beating fast, faster. And if it's beating faster, it's using, needs more oxygen. It's working harder. And in patients who have ischemic heart disease, where those coronary arteries are occluded partially or even completely, that can precipitate an ischemic attack, even myocardial infarcts and a heart attack, or possibly arrhythmia. All dangerous. Gastrointestinal obstruction. Anybody who's got a paralytic ileus or severe ulcerative colitis, because inhibiting the GI motility can aggravate these conditions. It's all so logical. It's all, I'm sure you can see that it's all related to the mechanism of the drug, the effects of the drug, and the effects it has on these various systems in patients who are at risk for the adverse effects. okay let's talk about the Toxidrome Toxic Syndrome Toxidrome is a portmanteau they all make sense now that we know what the adverse effects are and the mechanism so a rapid and weak pulse that heart is just beating like mad iris practically obliterated so the vision is blurred, and the cycloplegia. Skin is flushed, hot, dry, and scarlet. Ataxia, restlessness, excitement, hallucinations, delirium, seizures, coma. Of course, dose dependent. And I have the whole toxidrome mnemonic on the next slides. But let's talk about reversal first. Phisostigmine. I'm sure you remember phisostigmine. This is the cholinomimetic cholinesterase inhibitor, cholinesterase inhibitor that crosses the CNS. Okay, so we're talking about the adverse effects of atropine toxicity, which means it's a high dose, which means it's gotten into the CNS, which makes sense that if we want to reverse agents, reverse the toxic effects in the CNS, we need something that will get in there and outcompete the atropine. So that would be fisostigmine. However, fisostigmine itself has adverse effects, and its use is controversial. And certainly, only people who are experienced with the use of phisostigmine should ever use it. For most patients with anticholinergic toxicity, supportive therapy alone is adequate. This is going to be based on individuals. Contraindication of phisostigmine. drugs that are not after pain that also have those anti-muscarinic effects these fysostigmine is contraindicated with these toxicities tricyclic antidepressants you'll learn about those later phenylstiazine derivatives antipsychotics you'll learn about those later antihistamines first generation these all also have anti-muscarinic effects in addition to their therapeutic action bisostigmine can exacerbate the adverse effects because these drugs have all kinds of different effects not just anti -muscarinic effects and that can lead to severe complications. Okay, mnemonic, and I have pictures on the next slide if you'd like to move your vision down to it while I talk about it. Red is a beat, dry is a bone, blind is a bat, hot is Hades, mad is a hatter, the bowel and bladder lose their tone, and the heart runs alone. That one's a later edition by somebody. I like it, so I added it too. Red is a beat. Let's go to the Next slide. Red as a beet. This is the atropine flush. This is a scarlet skin. Hot, dry, scarlet skin. Dry as a bone. All those secretions are inhibited. Blind as a bat because of medriasis and cycloplegia. Hot as Hades because of hyperthermia, tachycardia, hypertension, and mad as a hatter. Here's the explanation for the etiology of that term, Matt is a hatter. In the past, hatters would breathe in the mercury fumes from the felt they were making, and all that mercury could eventually, over time, cause psychotic effects in the brain. all right hair special populations can we use them in pregnancy well if the person absolutely positively needs it as an antidote certainly we should give it but not as a general statement infants and young children well if we have to give it then to save the child's life then Absolutely, but a patient must be in a place where the adverse effects, the hyperthermia, can be monitored for and treated if it should appear. And, of course, elderly. Older patients. I prefer the word older patients. There seems to be a spectrum of older patients, young older patients, medium older patients, and very older patients. Susceptible to both peripheral and CNS effects. The point I want to make here, and this is true with so many drugs. Drugs with anticholinergic effects should be avoided in older individuals because the side effects of the drugs outweigh the benefits. The drugs can cause impaired cognition and confusion and psychoses, imagine that in the person who already has dementia can lead to falls. Elderly people tend to have worse balance, tend to fall more easily. So these drugs really should be avoided. Not the inhaled ones. They don't get into the bloodstream. They're safe in the older person as well as the younger person. So a few thought questions. I'll read them to you and invite you to pause your computer and think about them. Pause your video, I mean. A hospitalized patient is diagnosed with symptomatic sinus bradycardia. What drug can be administered? The drug is administered by rapid IV push to avoid a specific adverse effect. What is that adverse effect than the proposed mechanism. And Jannie is a 38-year-old woman prone to car sickness. She places a small patch that looks like a round band-aid behind her ear the day before she and a companion are leaving for a road trip across country. What is the drug? Other than convenience, what is an advantage of this route of administration? So, if you wish, now's a good time to pause. Okay so let's talk about the answers. Atropine is the drug. It blocks the vagal effects that normally slow the heart rate which is which allows unopposed sympathetic nervous system stimulation. That's where the increased heart rate comes from resulting in increased heart rate and improved conduction through the AV node. The drug is administered by rapid IV push to mitigate any potential for paradoxical bradycardia. The initial low dose of atropine from a slow intravenous injection may initially block inhibitory presynaptic receptors, causing acetylcholine release, thus slowing the heart rate. So, rapid IV administration avoids this effect. And now we have Jannie, who's going on a road trip, and she places a small patch behind her ear. Transdermal scopolamine bypasses first-pass metabolism and maintains steady, consistent blood levels and avoids peaks and troughs. Avoiding high peak concentrations may reduce dizziness and drowsiness and other side effects. Plus, she has the convenience of wearing it for three days before having to remove it. And an otherwise healthy 77-year-old female presents to the family practice clinic with signs and symptoms of respiratory infection that would likely respond to a macrolide antibiotic. The patient takes oxybutynin for urinary incontinence due to bladder spasms. Which macrolide antibiotics would lead to an increase in the anti-muscarinic side effects of oxybutanin? Okay, I know you haven't had macrolide antibiotics. If you want, you can set this one aside until later. Or you can say to yourself, well, I can at least come up with the mechanism of the drug interaction. I've given you a hint. It is a pharmacokinetics -related mechanism. And then the next question is, a 62 -year-old male ****** diagnosed with COPD is given prescriptions for a LAMA, of course our acronyms became pronounced words, and a SABBA, and guidance for smoking cessation. What are the drugs and how will a patient take them? If you'd like to think about it for a moment, it would be a good time to pause. So the mechanism of this pharmacokinetic mechanism of drug interactions is CYP3A4. I will be mentioning CYP3A4 many times in this particular block of pharmacology. Erythromycin and clorithromycin are strong CYP3A4 inhibitors. So we already learned about this metabolism in CYPs. So inhibiting CYP3A4 is going to inhibit the metabolism of oxybutanin, which will lead to increased levels of oxybutanin in the bloodstream. And we remember that oxybutynin is a muscarinic antagonist. It's got some selectivity for M3 receptors, but as concentrations go up, selectivity goes down. And the drug will have a myriad of side effects. A 62-year-old male ****** diagnosed with COPD. Okay, he's given a Lama and a Lassaba. So what are they? Tiotropium is the long-acting anti -muscarinic drug and our antagonist, and that's used for maintenance of bronchodilation. It's long-acting. It has a long duration of activity. It will continue to block the cholinergic bronchoconstriction. Okay, so that's going to allow unopposed activation of beta-2 receptors on bronchial smooth muscle, which will cause bronchodilation. So the patient is given a short-acting beta agonist, albuterol, for direct stimulation of the beta-2 receptors. We'll talk about this in the next lecture. and this is going to cause bronchial smooth muscle relaxation and bronchodilation so you get these two actions working in concert with each other causing a sustained bronchodilation and allowing easier breathing for patients who have COPD or asthma. And a 30 year old female presents to the in emergency department with confusion, delirium, hot flush dry skin, dilated pupils, tachycardia, hypotension, conduction anomalies, and absent, it should be hypertension. I just noticed that. Hypertension, conduction anomalies, and absent bowel sounds. She has a seizure while in the ED. Her roommate shows the health care team an empty prescription vial labeled amitriptyline 50 milligrams daily and dated yesterday so amitriptyline is a tricyclic antidepressant it's got atropine like or anti -muscarinic activity which is not its main main pharmacologic therapeutic effect why should the reversal agent for anti-muscarinic toxic toxicity be avoided in this patient Overdose, bi-tricyclic antidepressants, or phenothiazine derivatives, or other drugs that have anticholinergic actions, have a wide range of adverse effects, including cardiac toxicity. Physo-stigmine can exacerbate them and lead to severe complications. A 20-year-old pregnant female agricultural worker is brought to the emergency room. with confusion and other signs and symptoms of cholinergic toxicity consistent with poisoning by insecticides. Her co-worker reports that carbamate, not organophosphate, insecticides were used. She is treated with decontamination, respiratory, and cardiovascular support. What is the reversal agent and should it be administered to this patient? The reversal agent is atropine. Now remember, pralidoxime is not indicated because it's not organophosphate poisoning, and pralidoxime is not effective against poisoning bicarbamate insecticides. And yes, atropine could be administered because it is life -threatening and the benefit far outweighs any risk to the fetus. And here's our summary, which I won't go through and read it to you. I hope it's helpful to you. And here are the Check Your Knowledge questions and answers. And thank you very much. Thank you.