Welcome students to the Pharmacology of the Ganglionic and Neuromuscular Nicotinic Receptor Antagonists. Dr. Goldstein speaking. We've been talking in previous lectures about drugs active at the muscarinic receptors, whether activators or blockers, and now we will switch over to blockers of the nicotinic receptors. Please do contact me if you'd like to have a chat about pharmacology. These are the learning objectives. They are titles as you can see with the learning objectives indicated in the following sentences. I provide you with a lot of learning resources. you simply do not need to use them all. I'm sure by now you're finding out what types of resources you do like to use in order for that new learning to go into your brain. You may use the videos if you wish. You may use the PowerPoints. You may use textbooks. I highly recommend practice questions. and I certainly have my own practice questions required because they will help you to see how I write questions for the exams and they give you a board-style question and in the answers I explain the reasoning. This whole thing is to help you apply pharmacologic concepts to integrate them. Here are the list of learning resources that I have recommended. There are certainly more. If you use books that you like better than these, by all means do. The review books all contain practice questions. And of course, ScholarRx bricks also contain practice questions. The key points that are following are intended to help you to grasp the main ideas, the answer to what is it I need to know. I have organized them according to the learning objectives, so each slide is one of the learning objectives. We'll not go through them, you're perfectly capable of doing that if you wish to. And that brings us to the beginning of the lecture. As a brief review and focusing now on the nicotinic receptors and with this extremely simplified figure here on the left side the spinal column here the neurons autonomic nervous system neurons coming out neuromuscular neurons coming out the nicotinic receptors I am circling now. And these are the receptors that we will be talking about. Ganglionic receptors, of course we have a nicotinic receptor at the adrenal medulla and neuromuscular junction. Parasympathetic, sympathetic. The drug that we will be talking about is mechamilamine. There are a couple of others that this one's no longer in use. This one is experimental only. This one is still manufactured and marketed, but it's really rarely used. So you may ask yourself the question, well, if they're not used, why do I need to learn them? Why are they included in a pharmacology lecture? Because if you can understand all the mechanisms and side effects, the mechanism and all of the side effects that occur with mechamilamine, then you will have a strong understanding of the autonomic nervous system. Here are the circles. And this, we'll begin with the ganglion, the ganglionic blockers. So ganglion, ganglion, this is actually not ganglion, this is adrenal medulla, but it will be affected. Ganglion and ganglion. We'll talk about the pharmacology of the ganglionic blocking drugs now. They are non-depolarizing neuronal blockers of these neuronal nicotinic receptors. So they block the ganglionic transmission of parasympathetic and sympathetic autonomic ganglia. as well as the adrenal medulla. Compare this to nicotine, which causes dose-dependent depolarizing block. Nicotine, of course, is an agonist. And persistent presence of nicotine at the junction will cause the depolarizing block. Mechamelamine is the example we'll use. It has a really kind of interesting mechanism of action, which is why I'm starting with it. It's called a channel plug. When the agonist, and we'll think about acetylcholine here, blocks the open channel pore, sorry, when acetylcholine opens the channel, the drug will get inside and block the channel pore When the agonist unbinds, the channel closes around the drug, and that traps the drug molecule inside. Persistent block cannot be overcome by adding more agonist. Looking at the structure activity relationship now, the figure of mechamelamine structure is at the bottom. the arrow is pointing to the amino group there and we see that it has two bonds so it has a bicyclic oops hold on a second has a bicyclic structure and that fits into the channel pore and it has lower affinity for the neuromuscular nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. So we're thinking about ganglia, not neuromuscular block. In terms of pharmacokinetics, it is available ******. It's greeted unchanged in the urine and has the duration anywhere between six and more than 12 hours. It does cross the blood-brain barrier, uncharged and lipophilic, and it will inhibit the central nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. And just incidentally, it is a weak base, so acidic urine increases the rate of of excretion and may decrease the therapeutic effect. The other two are trimethophan, competitive antagonist that does not cross the blood -brain barrier. It is not widely available, if available at all. Hexamethonium is this six carbon structure and it's only used experimentally. it's never been used as a therapeutic for humans or animals. Now you may be thinking oh my goodness with all of these with all of with inhibition of both the parasympathetic and the sympathetic and the adrenal medulla there must be a lot of responses that can occur and that's true. Responses to treatment with ganglionic blockers are complex and largely unpredictable, which I'll go into on the next slide. The big points are that ganglionic blockers suppress the outflow, because they're inhibitors, from the nicotinic receptors in both the parasympathetic, sympathetic ganglia, and at the adrenal medulla. And as a result, that's going to suppress all autonomic flow out of that area. Also, they suppress the homeostatic reflexes. So I'll give you an example of that in a moment. Homeostatic reflexes are important for keeping us in homeostasis. They moderate, in this case, the autonomic responses. So this is suppressed. The homeostatic reflexes that will adjust the heart rate is suppressed. The vasculature is suppressed. Neurologic, muscle, neurohumeral reflexes, all suppressed. So I want to mention the mechanism of baroreceptor signaling. this will keep coming up. I know you haven't had the cardiovascular system yet, but this is easy to understand. It's quite logical. I put a picture here on the right-hand side of the carotid sinuses, baroreceptors, and the baroreceptors in the aortic arch. So that's what we're going to be referring to when we talk about baroreceptors. Their normal function is to moderate responses in blood pressure. They transmit signals from the baroreceptors to the brain and back to the effector organs. So an example is, two examples, are if there is a rapid fall in blood pressure, this is sensed by the baroreceptors. A fall in blood pressure, what does the body need to do? It needs to bring the pressure back up. So, the baroreceptor sends signal to the medulla oblongata, and that will disinhibit the sympathetic nervous system, which will cause increased tone coming out of the ganglia, out of the medulla, through the ganglia, to cause vasoconstriction, increased heart rate. and that will help bring up the blood pressure. Now on the other hand, a rapid rise in blood pressure also sensed by the baroreceptors. So what does the body need to do? It needs to moderate by bringing down the blood pressure. Again, signals are sent to the medulla oblongata and back to the parasympathetic nervous system which has increased tone, increased activity, And that will slow the heart rate and will cause some vasodilation as well and lower the blood pressure. So that's what we're talking about with autonomic reflexes. In this case, the blood pressure reflexes. So the suppression of blood pressure reflexes, this baroreceptors, which the activity through the ganglia is needed, but now it's suppressed, so we don't get those autonomic reflexes to changes in blood pressure. Here we have the chart of the various effects that the ganglion blockers can cause. It's easiest to think about this in terms of dominant tone. So what is the dominant tone coming out of the sympathetic nervous system, out of the parasympathetic nervous system? So let's think about it in the resting individual. the dominant tone for the arterioles and veins is sympathetic because there's always a basal amount of sympathetic activity to keep our blood pressure at a homeostatic level so arterioles and veins the dominant tone is sympathetic and that's going to cause some vasoconstriction What is the opposite effect that occurs because the ganglionic nicotinic receptors are blocked? Well, it's going to be opposite, dilation, instead of vasoconstriction, dilation. So mechamelamine causes dilation of the veins and arterioles. I have put in bold here, severe orthostatic hypotension is a side effect of mechamelamine because, remember, the reflexes are also blunted. Normally, when we go from a lying down position to a standing up position, the baroreceptors sense the lowering of blood pressure, particularly in the lower extremities, and send a message to constrict and push the blood right back up to the heart. Since these reflexes are blunted, the veins don't constrict and therefore syncope, fainting, can happen. Patients will feel kind of dizzy, a sort of dizziness, a lightheadedness, a sort of a veil falling over their eyes and could lead to fainting. the parasympathetic is the dominant tone at rest think rest and digest so what's the dominant tone the parasympathetic tone in the heart that would be a slowed heart rate blocking the ganglia a fast heart rate in the eye the iris So we get some meiosis, block that, we get a little medriasis. The ciliary muscle is important for contraction of the lens so that we can see at near vision. This gets blocked. So the cycloplegia, this effect of the ciliary muscle is paralyzed. loss of accommodation. These two together, blurred vision. It's hard to write on the screen so it's a little bit messy. GI tract, the parasympathetic rest and digest. digest. So there would be increased tone, increased motility, increased secretions, and this gets blocked. And motility can be profoundly affected. That can cause marked constipation. The secretion of gastric acid is reduced. The drugs, however, are not effect really effective at reducing acid enough to treat peptic ulcer this is because acid secretion is related to a number of different systems not just the parasympathetic system urinary bladder well promotes micturition what can happen if it's blocked urinary retention and we see this particularly in males with prostatic hyperplasia because that prostate is enlarged and it's pushing on the urinary equipment. The ******* tract, well, both of these get blocked, so ****** impairment. Salivary glands, salivary glands are really sensitive to stimulation by the parasympathetics. So what do we get? Dry mouth, xerostomia is another word for dry mouth. Sweat glands, yes these are sympathetic. There is as I said a low level of sympathetic activity, a basal level it's called. at all times and sweat glands are important for sweating, obviously. This is especially important for when the temperature is high, ambient, oops, when ambient temperature is high. Oh, look at this, a new thing. So I won't write. So ambient temperature is high or we're exercising. We need to sweat. And the ganglion blockers prevent that sweating. And that's called anhydrosis. So please be familiar with sites of action, dominant tone in these various sites, parasympathetic really being the major tone except for the vasculature, and of course sweat glands because the sweat glands are not innovated by the parasympathetic system even though they are cholinergic. And the effects of blocking. Now, we talked about the effects in terms of resting tone. What if the person is under stress and the dominant tone is sympathetic? So you know what happens when the dominant tone is sympathetic. We get all of these different things happening, vasoconstriction, increased increased heart rate, increased sweating, and all these various functions. So that would all be reversed in the individual with an up-regulated sympathetic tone. Well, what would we use mechamelamine for? Traditionally, it's been used for hypertension treatment. It was developed long before, well I don't know about how long, but it was developed before the drugs that are currently used for the management of hypertension. The current drugs are much more selective, much better tolerated than mechamelamine. I want to emphasize again the orthostatic hypotension that can be severe because of these absent baroreceptor reflexes. Drug interactions, high, and this is related to drugs that have the same effects, it's related to drugs that actually act at the effector organs. They will still be, they will still have an effect because they're acting directly on the effector organs whereas the mechamelamine is acting upstream. Contraindications, these really are important, but you can really predict them. So a patient with coronary insufficiency or recent myocardial infarction, well, we're reducing the sympathetic output by blocking the sympathetic ganglia. Pyloric stenosis, that's going to cause gastric stasis, and we know these drugs are already, they already reduce motility. Glaucoma. By causing cycloplegia and medriasis, that is going to reduce the outflow of the aqueous humor at the canal of Schlem. That can cause an increase in intraocular pressure, which can exacerbate glaucoma. With uremia, reduced blood flow to the kidney. So reduced blood flow to the kidney can cause reduced activity of the kidney, kidney impairment, kidney insufficiency. And therefore, all these waste products, these nitrogenous waste products, can accumulate. Now, this is an interesting one we don't see all the time. Unreliable, uncooperative patients. The drug has to be taken at least twice a day. Dosing is really complicated. Therapy has to be carefully monitored, and the drugs can cause this severe orthostatic hypotension. So, as I said in In the beginning, the effects are complicated and unpredictable. So if a patient is going to be taking this drug, the patient needs to be well informed of what they can possibly do and the fact that they need to be carefully monitored and the orthostatic hypotension that can cause falling. Here are a few questions. I invite you to pause the computer, take a look at the questions, see if you can answer them without looking, and if you can't, by all means look back at the PowerPoint and you will find the answers. So I'll give them to you now. These are posted it at the end of the PowerPoint, please don't look. This is intended to help you try and solidify that information in those good brains of yours. Ganglion blockers suppress all autonomic outflow of the neuronal nicotinic receptors at the parasympathetic sympathetic ganglia and the adrenal medulla, and this suppresses all autonomic outflow and suppresses autonomic homeostatic reflexes that normally moderate autonomic responses. Normal cardiac, vascular, neurologic, muscle, and neurohumeral reflexes. Mechanism, orthostatic hypotension, which is a significant drop in blood pressure on standing, and syncope is pronounced because postural reflexes, which are sympathetic responses that normally prevent venous pooling, are abolished. Symptoms are dizziness, lightheadedness, and fainting. Syncope. Why should mechamelamine be prescribed for patients who are reliable and cooperative with the therapy? Because the dosing can be complicated, therapies must be monitored, and the drugs cause ozostatic hypotension. Since it's rarely used, why should students learn about it? Well, it might appear on a board exam, but other than that, understanding the effects of ganglion blockers requires a deep knowledge of autonomic nervous system. Grasping the concepts means students can appreciate how ganglion blockers influence various physiologic processes and manage the potential side effects and clinical implications effectively. Because the bottom line? Because understanding the autonomic nervous system and what it does and what blocking it does, is important to your medical knowledge and medical practice. So let's move now to the neuromuscular blocking agents, NMBAs. There are four that are starred, and they are in two different groups, the isoquinolines, which are atricurium and cis-atricurium, so you can see that's an enantiomer, and the amino steroids which are called rocuronium and vecuronium. I'm sure you recognize suffix here. Curium and curium like curare and ronium, ronium, ronium. And of course succinylcholine, a very important and widely used depolarizing neuromuscular blocking agent. Picture here, just to remind you a little bit about the synapse at the neuromuscular junction. Here we have the bouton in French, or the button. Let me see some buttons over here. I'm not going to touch the picture because it's giving me messages. An action potential comes on down that neuron, the calcium channels open, the calcium rushes in, the vesicles move to the plasma membrane, exocytose their neurotransmitter contents into the synapse, Acetylcholine, and acetylcholine that bumps into the nicotinic receptors binds to its receptor site, causes opening of the channel, and that in turn produces an action potential down through the muscle fibers, causing muscle contraction. so that we have the non -depolarizing blockers and the depolarizing blocker, which I'll get into more detail. First, we need to look at the nicotinic receptor. Again, the circled one on panel B there at the top is the neuromuscular nicotinic receptor configuration. There are two alpha subunits, a delta, beta 1, and a gamma. An older patient, in older people, it would be an epsilon. The neuronal nicotinic receptors, again, they've shaped exactly the same, but they have different subunits. This one is an example of a neuromuscular, sorry, a nicotinic receptor with only alpha subunits, and these red circles here are the binding sites of acetylcholine, and this is another type. So there are various types. The cation flows through the open channel. And when the channel has not been activated, it's closed. Here is a acetylcholine binding pocket. There's another acetylcholine binding pocket back there. Structure activity relationship. Acetylcholine at the top to remind you about the structure, simple structure. Succinylcholine is just two acetylcholines hooked together. It's indicated in this illustration in such a way that you can see that it's actually two acetylcholines here. But it's really a linear molecule, and it's a floppy molecule. It's flexible. The NMBAs, neuromuscular blocking agents that are non-depolarizing, the isoquinolines and aminosteroids, you can see, are much bigger. This is pancuronium, not used much anymore. but it was the first one of the group and see how bulky and rigid the structure looks even even just laid out like this. This is mivacurium, a benzyl isoquinoline, also no longer in use, but it is representative of the structure of the benzyl isoquinolines. Again, a larger bulkier molecule than succinylcholine. Pancuronium, they've outlined here the acetylcholine-like components of the structure. So let's begin. Of course you need to know all class actions and effects and you need to know the starred ones by name, their specific pharmacology. Knowing the class actions, though, and effects, start with that. Start here in your learning, even before you learn a drug name, because the drugs are going to have class actions and effects. There and maybe a couple of other features that set them apart. Put the benzyl isoquinolines at the top and the amino steroids at the bottom for no particular reason. Atricurium and cis-atricurium, obviously the cis isomer. Atricurium, hepatic hydrolysis, and something called spontaneous Hoffman elimination. What Hoffman elimination is, it's just a chemical reaction. It doesn't require enzymes, doesn't occur in the liver, doesn't occur in the kidney. It's just this spontaneous degradation of the molecule. Laudanazine happens to be a byproduct of Hoffman elimination of atricurium. Okay this is not usually a big deal. It is a CNS stimulant, doesn't have any blocking activity, has a longer half -life and it can accumulate and once it gets into the CNS, it's excitatory, it can cause seizures. But this only occurs with long infusions such as being given to to a person in the ICU for management of mechanical ventilation. So atricurium really is not the best choice for management of mechanical ventilation. Cis atricurium also undergoes Hoffman elimination, but it is given at a much lower dose because it's more potent than atracurium. And therefore, this laudanosine byproduct just doesn't accumulate to any significant degree. Let's talk about onset. Not exactly fast, two minutes is kind of a long time when you're waiting for the paralysis to occur. Recovery, this is all related to, draw your attention down here to the bottom, plasma clearance, and that's what we're talking about with elimination, volume of distribution, elimination half-lives may be influenced by patient age, volatile anesthetics, and the presence of renal or hepatic disease depending on the drug, which is why we get this range. So, duration is about 20 to 35 minutes, but it can take an hour and a half for the atricurium to clear out enough that there is 95% recovery. Cysatricurium, again, the total duration is dose-dependent, and these other factors as well that I mentioned. Looking at the amino steroids, rocuronium is mainly biliary. Not much goes through the kidney. It's got an onset of one to two minutes. This is quick now. This is considered quick. And it can have a typical duration. It can be short, like this, like the others, or quite long, depending on the dose and the patient factors. Vecuronium, now this goes through biliary secretion and biliary, think liver, and renal. So this is the only one in the group that is excreted through the kidneys. Onset, it's pretty long, two and a half to three minutes. Recovery, pretty typical of the others. All right, let's look at potency for a moment. Potency is related to tubocuraring potency, so that's one. That was the first one. That is the prototype of this group. It's not used anymore because it will block neuronal nicotinic receptors and cause histamine to be released and cause significant side effects. So compared to tubulcururine, atricurium, cis-atricurium are a bit more potent. Vecuronium is a lot more potent. But rocuronium is less potent. So what does all this potency business mean? It has to do with how much drug is going to be administered in order to produce an effect. I'm sure you remember the basic pharmacology principle. that a less potent drug requires more molecules of the drug to be at the site of action to have enough molecules there to produce the effect. Association, dissociation constants, all that basic pharmacodynamics. So all this is telling us is that rocuronium needs more molecules to be administered to produce the effect, it'll be the same effect, and as a result of all these molecules flowing into the synapse, it can have a faster onset because there's just more molecules being administered because of the dosing, simple concept. All right, mechanism. At the top, we have a normally functioning nicotinic receptor. These little spheres are acetylcholine. Acetylcholine enters a synapse, binds to its receptor, which is right here on this figure, and causes channel opening. This oval is now in a vertical conformation and sodium here flows through. That's the normal. Notice that the acetylcholine has to be in high enough quantity in order for it to accidentally bump into the receptor, bind to it and activate it. Here this is just a molecule that's going off directly into the acetylcholinesterase for degradation into choline and acetate. Now on the bottom part here we have our acetylcholine again and we have our non -depolarizing blocker. Here's the key and it is this light colored sphere that is yellow is on the acetylcholine receptor site and it's preventing opening of the channel. So that's it, competitive antagonist, simple concept. Here we have the depolarizing blocker, succinylcholine is the only one in clinical use, this new thing, where these are depolarizing blocker, and this is a darker blue color, is binding to the acetylcholine receptor, and also it's kind of stuck here in the channel as well. So it will initially open, see the channel is initially opened, sodium will flow through before the drug actually gets stuck in the channel, And once it's in the channel, sodium cannot flow through, the channel is blocked, even though you see it in the open confirmation. That's the basic difference. Competitive antagonism versus initial opening and then block, depolarizing block. You don't need to memorize this slide. It's here for context. It's helpful to understand the order in which the muscles become paralyzed. So the small ones first, then muscles of the limbs and trunk and abdomen, then the intercostal, so we have our respiratory muscles, and finally the diaphragm and respiration ceases. Patient is not able to breathe because of the muscle paralysis and once the drug is withdrawn and wears off, is eliminated, it's the function returns in the reverse order. So what do we use these for? Well to facilitate intubation to relax the laryngeal and jaw muscles to get the patient intubated, to facilitate surgery, operative manipulation, to cause those muscles to relax for easier surgery. Importantly, by administering a neuromuscular blocking agent, less surgical anesthesia can be used. If the neuromuscular blocker is not administered, it takes a greater depth of surgical anesthesia in order to bring about neuromuscular block with the anesthetic. So giving the neuromuscular blocker, we can give less anesthesia because the level of anesthesia needs to be to the level of sedation, but not to the level of neuromuscular block. We also use them for mechanical ventilation, patients in the ICU who are on mechanical ventilation because as you would anticipate, thoracic compliance is improved by giving, by paralyzing the muscles. And they can be used as an adjunct in orthopedic procedures. These are intuitive. You could imagine that the neuromuscular blockers would be really useful for these purposes. Please, please remember. Consciousness and sensorium are intact. The patient is conscious. The patient is aware of what's going on. The patient can feel. The patient can feel pain. they're not responding and therefore you they're not giving any signals when they're in pain please remember that delivering a neuromuscular blocking agent is not the same as anesthesia anesthesia needs to be administered and And of course, monitored. Everything gets monitored. These are not, these are potentially serious. These are, these drugs should be used by people who are experienced in their use. Okay, reversal. All right, patient has undergone the surgery or whatever procedure, and now the neuromuscular blocking agent is withdrawn. It's no longer being administered. You may recall that the time to 95% recovery can be half an hour to two hours, depending on the drug. So a reversal agent is appropriate. Looking first at the benzyl isylcholines here, atricurium and cis-atricurium, use a cholinesterase inhibitor. Remember, these are competitive antagonists. So what are we going to do? We are going to increase the amount of acetylcholine in the synapse to out-compete the neuromuscular blocker. A basic pharmacologic principle put into action. Neostigmine is the cholinesterase inhibitor most used for this purpose. Should there be a shortage or some reason, neostigmine is not available, pyridostigmine can also be used. The aminosteroids, the rocuronium and becuronium specifically, and just those two, can be reversed using a drug by the name of Sigamidex. Picture of it here. I mean this is a representation by an artist. These molecules in here, this represents the amino steroid. The sagamidex is the cyclodextrin, it's called. And it actually encases, traps, envelops the neuromuscular blocker in there. And then it's done in a one-to-one ratio, one molecule to one molecule, just the way this figure represents. Complexes are created in the urine. It acts very rapidly. Cholinesterase inhibitors can be used as well. Sagamidex is expensive. And if there's a shortage of it, it's also nice to know that we can use a cholinesterase inhibitor. so we have a couple of notations here about these drugs let's look at the cholinesterase inhibitors first well it's cholinesterase inhibitor it's increasing acetylcholine levels not only in the neuromuscular junction but everywhere and that can cause the secretions increasing secretions it can cause this vagal stimulation which will cause slow heart rate bradycardia Large doses administered when the neuromuscular block is minimal, in other words, when the patient is nearing recovery, can result in more block because excessive acetylcholine in the neuromuscular junction will lead to a depolarizing. Go back to our cholinesterase inhibitors pharmacology and look at the potential adverse effects of the drugs. Sigamidex is generally quite well tolerated. The serious adverse effects are rare. It's just a one-time dose usually to trap the aminosteroid and quickly remove it from the bloodstream. What can happen though? We always need to know what can happen. So bradycardia and ECG abnormalities so we just hook them up. Monitor it. The drug is encapsulating this amino steroid. It is a steroid structure. It doesn't have any steroid activity, but it is a steroid structure. And so it can actually also capture the steroids in contraceptive, in hormonal contraceptive, and that could at least transiently reduce the effectiveness of the contraceptive. Individuals should be made aware of that. It can increase coagulation parameters. This is something they would like to ask on a board exam. Fortunately, clinically significant bleeding has not been reported in all the years of use of the drug. So let's take now a look at the adverse effects of these blocking agents. Prolonged apnea, as you would expect. So So think about risk factors for the patient. If there's inadequate reversal, of course, so that must be carefully monitored to make sure the patient recovers. Residual neuromuscular block, prolonged surgery, opioids, all of these things will prolong the potential of respiratory suppression due to prolonged recovery rates. Electrolyte abnormalities, acidosis, hypokalemia, hypocalcemia, and too much magnesium. Potassium, calcium low, magnesium high, and acidosis. Burns. Caution. Do not give it to patients with burns. Because they already have myopathies, they already have too much potassium, and giving a neuromuscular blocker can increase the muscle damage. So we get increased doses that would be needed. Diseases where there is already a myasthenic syndrome, let's call it. So there's reduced activity at the neuromuscular junction because of these autoimmune diseases. As always, the very young and very old will be more sensitive. It's true with practically all drugs. Practically all drugs can potentially cause hypersensitivity reactions in the vulnerable individual. Fortunately, these are rare. And then drug interactions, anything that causes a greater degree of neuromuscular blockade. Aminoglycosides and certain other antibiotics can cause neuromuscular block on their own. So we're putting in a neuromuscular blocker and there can be an exaggerated effect. Some drugs potentiate or inhibit NMBA effects and all of respiratory depression, electrolyte imbalance. Basically what we're talking about with these drug interactions is drugs that also cause all of these effects. All right, so in summary, let's compare the different ones. I've put here in bold and the color I put them in is red, so that you can figure out what exactly are the differences between these drugs if I want to be selecting the perfect neuromuscular blocking agent for my patient. Atricurium causes histamine release, and histamine release causes skin flushing as there's vasodilation in the superficial vessels of the skin. Hypotension from vasodilation again. And tachycardia, because this is a homeostatic reflex, reflex tachycardia to hypotension that I mentioned earlier in the lecture. Metabolism. Well, it's this plasma esterase, so that's liver. and this Hoffman elimination, which is laudanazine. And the laudanazine can accumulate, and that can cause seizure. But this is, of course, long infusions of this drug. It can be given in renally impaired patients because it doesn't go through the kidney. Now, cis-atricurium, the cis-enantiomer, the cis-isomer, is Hoffman elimination, but it's given it a much lower dose, so the laudanazine is not likely to accumulate. So, the takeaway here is cis -atricurium does not cause significant laudanazine accumulation. Procuronium, quick onset, and when we think quick onset, we think it can be used for rapid sequence intubation, which it frequently is. That's the big difference here. It can be given to patients with renal impairment, remember that it has between rocuronium and vecuronium, it has really minor renal secretion. So vecuronium, what's the takeaway here? Not suitable for rapid sequence intubation and also hepatic metabolism and excretion through the biliary and renal roots. Therefore, patients with liver or kidney impairment may have a prolonged response because it is not being cleared out as fast. Basic pharmacology principles you've already learned very well. So let's talk about succinylcholine now, the depolarizing neuromuscular blocking agent. Some pharmacokinetic information, succinylcholine, remember it's two acetylcholines together, is metabolized by plasmacholinesterase, but not by acetylcholinesterase, but it is by plasmacholinesterase. Therefore, the drug is put into a vein, passes through the bloodstream and a small fraction of the dose actually reaches the motor end plate and the dosing has been figured out based on this. Onset, less than a minute basically, really quick, short duration of action. Pharmacogenomics, think about plasmacolinesterase, pharmacogenomics. In patients with deficient or absent plasmacolinesterase, because of these genetic variants, B stands for butyral colonesterase, which is the gene that produces this protein, that expresses this protein, plasmacolinesterase. If deficient, that same dose that's given to a person with normally functioning plasma cholinesterase is going to get a larger fraction of succinylcholine at the neuromuscular end plate, and that's going to cause an increased duration of effect. So please remember this pharmacogenomics principle. Fortunately, it's really rare, but it's still something you need to remember. Very short duration because it's rapidly hydrolyzed by the liver butyrocholinesterase and plasmacholinesterase, but mainly plasma. Not degraded by acetylcholinesterase, but it is by plasmacholinesterase. Remember, plasma cholinesterase is also called pseudo, pseudo cholinesterase, they're the same thing. Succinylcholine blockade is terminated by diffusion, the drug diffuses out of the synapse. It is not terminated using a cholinesterase inhibitor because that would increase levels of acetylcholine in the synapse along with the succinylcholine. And remember the effect of depolarizing. Block was too much acetylcholine. So that's just going to make the block stronger. Mechanism of action. Yes, this is something you really should understand. There is an initial stimulation as the succinylcholine binds to the acetylcholine receptor sites, it causes opening of the channel. That's the initial thing that happens, the opening of the channel. So the membranes are depolarized, and that's going to cause these spontaneous little twitchings, and that's called fasciculations. You should know this word, fasciculations. as the calcium is released from the sarcoplasmic reticulum. Then the membranes become depolarized and unresponsive to subsequent impulses. Maybe you can visualize that little figure we saw in the beginning. And the succinylcholine finds its way into the actual channel as well as putting a block on the acetylcholine receptors and that will cause flaccid paralysis, skeletal muscle relaxation. Succinylcholine is usually given as a short dose and we get this is the block that occurs. At higher doses, phase two block can occur where the membranes now become repolarized. However, they are desensitized. The mechanism isn't clear. In all these years, it hasn't been defined. But the channels behave as though they're in a prolonged closed state. And later, in phase 2 block, which is a much higher dose or a much longer duration of time, then it becomes like a non-depolarizing block. Well, succinylcholine is associated with a number, a number of adverse effects. You will appreciate knowing them at some point in the future, and I highly recommend that you do get an understanding of the mechanisms of all of these side effects. So malignant hyperthermia, this is something that's seen in pediatric patients who have an undiagnosed skeletal muscle myopathy, like muscular dystrophy. It hasn't been diagnosed. Abnormal release of calcium stores in the skeletal muscle in these patients who have this myopathy. So this large amount of calcium that is released into the cytosol causes hyperthermia, too much potassium, hyperkalemia, acidosis, hemoglobinuria, myoglobinuria, and cardiovascular complications. Very serious. Volatile anesthetics can do this too, and we will be talking about volatile anesthetics in a future lecture. Treatment, I know you probably haven't had the pharmacology of dantrolene, so we'll just give you the high points here. This is not only a board-relevant treatment, it is a patient-relevant treatment, clinically relevant. it. So dantrolene blocks ryanodine receptors type 1, which are in skeletal muscle. By doing so, that prevents the release of calcium from the skeletal muscles. So that makes sense that it would be the treatment. Masseter spasm, well, this is in the lower jaw. That muscle can spasm. It appears to be associated with this whole muscle myopathy issue in pediatric patients. Myalgia, rhabdomyolysis, myoglobinumia, and this is because of muscle damage. Damage to the skeletal muscle cells. And what happens when skeletal muscle cells are damaged? They release their contents into the bloodstream. And we think about especially potassium being released into the bloodstream. Again, hyperkalemia keeps popping up, doesn't it? And hyperkalemia all on its own row. Rapid loss of intracellular potassium, such as occurs in patients with burns, burn patients, extensive burns. Neuromuscular trauma, trauma patients, patients with certain neuromuscular diseases. And this hyperkalemia can be life -threatening, which is why we keep bringing it up. It causes cardiac arrhythmias, and it can cause the heart to stop. Speaking of cardiac arrhythmias, this has its own row. Ventricular arrhythmias resulting from hyperkalemic rhabdomyolysis. You see how these are building on each other? Easy to remember if you start building your foundation and putting your structure on top of it. Bradycardia now, this seems to be related to the metabolite, succinyl monocholine. So that's a matter of monitoring. And atropine or glycopyrrolate, Mentioned in the anti -muscarinic lecture. Pre-treatment to prevent the bradycardia. And that will, of course, also prevent the excess secretions, salivary secretions, respiratory secretions. Oh, but we're not done. Increase in intragastric pressures, pressure in the stomach. And that can cause, what are we worried about? well these patients are undergoing surgery so we're afraid now of aspiration and aspiration of stomach contents can lead to being going into the lungs causing aspiration pneumonia increase in intraocular pressure again it's the muscle fasciculations around these eye muscles and that's going to cause distortion and compression of the globe so that will increase the pressure inside. Increased intracranial pressure, this is a transient effect. There have been a number of proposals as to the mechanism. It seems though to result from stimulation of afferent muscle activity because of all of this muscle fasciculation. And that, in turn, is a reflex that's going to increase cerebral blood flow, at least transiently. Plasma colon esterase deficiency, I referred to that earlier. Pharmacogenomics, the BCHE gene. I use a capital for that. and that can cause prolonged apnea with the succinylcholine dose because a greater amount of the succinylcholine reaches the synapse. This is a congenital homozygous for atypical BCHE gene. Also, plasma cholinesterase deficiency can be acquired. Burned patients, anemia, decompensated heart disease, infections, malignant tumors, severe hepatic dysfunction, why? Because it's made in the liver, pregnancy, and others. Hypersensitivity, always ask, history of allergic reaction to succinylcholine or any component of the formulation. So contraindications now follow from all that we've talked about up to this point. Anybody who's had a history of malignant hyperthermia clearly should not get this drug. Anyone with myopathy, muscle paralysis, has increased risk for malignant hyperthermia and should not get it. Rhabdomyolysis, ditto. Multiple trauma, and we have that muscle trauma. Spinal cord or upper motor, neuron injury, major burns. ocular injury because of this risk of hyperkalemia that can lead to arrhythmias and death. I have a few questions here. I recommend that you pause your computer and see if you can answer them. So here they are. Mechanistically, what is the difference between depolarizing block and non -depolarizing block? Depolarizing block, the drug initially causes ion channel opening, membrane depolarization and activation, followed by depolarization, was unresponsive to subsequent impulses. Competitive inhibitors of acetylcholine at the binding pockets prevent channel opening. What are the mechanisms of action of the neuromuscular blockade reversal agents for each of the NMBA subclasses? So the isoquinolines, cholinesterase inhibitors, increase synaptic concentrations of acetylcholine to out-compete the non -deprolarizing neuromuscular blocking agent. Aminosteroids, generally sagamidex, if available. This is the cyclodextrin, as I mentioned, that complexes with the amino steroid in a one-to -one ratio in plasma. And that will cause a rapid decline in the NMBA plasma concentrations as the complex is excreted in the urine. And succinylcholine diffuses out of the synapse, terminating neuromuscular block. Which non-depolarizing NMBA may cause prolonged duration of blockade in patients with liver or kidney impairment? So we think about vecuronium especially for the kidney impairment because it is excreted in liver and I mean especially for both liver and kidney impairments is what I'm I'm trying to say, because it's excreted through the liver, the biliary system, and excreted through the kidneys and the urine. So impairment of these organs can increase the duration of blockade, prolong the blockade, because the drug is not being cleared as quickly as in other people. So which NMBA that starred can cause flushing and hypotension. And what is the cause? Well, you see, flushing and hypotension, something that should jump to your mind right away is histamine release. So atricurium releases histamine, which acts on vascular histamine receptors causing vasodilation, thus a drop in blood pressure, hypotension, and skin reddening, flushing. Which NMBA can cause malignant hyperthermia in individuals with skeletal muscle disease? Ah, I know, I don't even have to show you the answer. Of course, it's succinylcholine and also inhaled anesthetics. What is the effect of NMBA administration to patients with autoimmune diseases, myasthenia gravis and Lambert -Eaton myasthenic syndrome? This is an autoimmune disease. Both of them are autoimmune diseases. Myasthenia gravis is antibodies against the nicotinic receptors in the neuromuscular junction. Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome is a decrease in the amount of acetylcholine that's released from the presynaptic terminals. Either way, these people are already at risk for muscle weakness. What is the mechanism of muscle fasciculations caused by succinylcholine? The depolarizing block binding to the acetylcholine receptors, initially causing ion channel opening and movement of the sodium through the channel leading to depolarization of the membranes causing small spontaneous twitching. List the serious adverse effects related to muscle fasciculations. Rhabdomyolysis, hyperkalemia, cardiac dysrhythmia, increased intragastric and intraocular pressure. What is the potential mechanism of the transient increased intracranial pressure caused by succinylcholine. Well, one proposed mechanism, which is likely, is stimulation of the afferent muscle activity leading to transient increased blood flow, cranial blood flow, that will, I should say, may stimulate afferent muscle activity leading to transient increased cerebral blood flow, and that will transiently increase intracranial pressure. Remember, succinylcholine does not cross the blood -brain barrier. None of these neuromuscular blocking agents crosses the blood -brain barrier. What is the name of the byproduct of NMBA metabolism that in high concentrations is associated with lowering the seizure threshold? So it's stated a little differently so you can think about it in this way. And that of course is atricurium, the Hoffman elimination that produces laudanazine, which in high concentrations, because of its long half-life, can accumulate in the CNS and cause seizures. What drugs can be administered before succinylcholine to mitigate the bradycardia caused by the NMBA? Well, think about what causes bradycardia? Vagal stimulation. So how can we block the vagal stimulation causing the bradycardia? Which is muscarinic receptors, anti-muscarinic drugs, atropine or glycopyrrolate. Atropine is the prototype of the group. Glycopyrrolate does not cross the blood -brain barrier. And the bradycardia is attributed to the succinyl monocholine, not the succinylcholine itself. Rapid-sequence intubation. Both succinylcholine, commonly used, and rocuronium have a rapid onset of action. For pediatric patients, rocuronium is often used because of the frequently undiagnosed muscular myopathies. Succinylcholine is contraindicated in what conditions? Patients with a history of malignant hyperthermia. Myopathy or muscle paralysis. rhabdomyolysis, multiple trauma, spinal cord or upper motor neuron injury, major burns, ocular injury, and we are worried about exaggerated hyperkalemia. So in summary, I'll let you read these to yourself. We've talked about them and summarize them extensively as of now. This is here just to kind of give you a little reminder. And the check your knowledge questions that we just talked about. On the left are two anesthesiologists who are inserting an endotracheal tube and on the right is the monitoring of the hand for neuromuscular transmission of the blocker. And that concludes this lecture.