Hello everyone. Dr. Adam Reno here. I'm going to be talking to you today about the pathology of the auditory and vestibular system. This is a very complex system and bear with me as we go through it as there's a lot of information. If you have any questions or concerns, please reach out to me in my email here listed on the first slide. Let's get rolling. Some session objectives. The first thing we're going to try to do is define the proper terminology related to dizziness. Decipher peripheral and central vertigo and what those mean. We're also going to discuss some hearing loss as well. So dizziness, what is it? One of the most challenging presentations that our patients are going to bring to us is I am dizzy. It is us as physicians who are going to be tasked with the challenge of trying to decipher what dizziness means to them? Is it dizziness where the world is spinning around them? Are they off balance? When they walk, are they feeling as if they're going to fall down? Is there intoxication involved or is it psychiatric? When they stand from a sitting position, are they lightheaded? In our evaluation of dizziness, we have to decide, is this dizziness dangerous? Is this something that is going to need prompt intervention or is this something that can be treated in the office today are referred to a specialist for treatment at a later time. If it is dangerous, this can be related to arrhythmias, TIAs, strokes. We also have to decide whether or not the vertiginous symptoms that they're having or dizziness is peripheral or central. This table has features of peripheral and central vertigo and it's a very quick way to decide whether or not it's central or peripheral. You can read through this. The thing that I want to point out and have you pay strict attention to on this slide is the presence of nystagmus. If you think about nystagmus, often it is present when there is peripheral vertigo that is there and it extinguishes with fixation. However, on central vertiginous symptoms, a lot of times that doesn't extinguish and it continues to persist. Also, tinnitus or deafness is often present with peripheral symptoms, and that's usually absent with central. On examination, some of the things we're going to be doing is assessing eye movements, vestibular functioning, and hearing. some of the terminology that we need to go through are eye movements itself so if you think about it some of the eye movement terminology it's not always easy but it's a good thing to remember as you're reading through history of patients and trying to figure out exactly what's going on as far as examination goes for example eye pursuit smoothly following a moving target poor pursuit in inaccurate saccades, that's usually central pathology, nystagmus, the involuntary back and forth movement of the eyes. Chart right here that I really like, I actually found it when I was preparing for this lecture from a previous lecture that was prepared for this same topic. It's just a quick approach to dizziness. Let's say you're in the emergency department and you have a patient come in and they're dizzy. This is a good quick way to decipher what that dizziness is and and what type of workup will follow. Clinical case number one. So we have a 60 -year-old female who's presenting to your clinic complaining of dizziness. Her symptoms have been worsening over the past hour and she does not have recent trauma to her head. She states that she has significant nausea and is very fearful that she will fall. She reports these symptoms in any position, whether standing, sitting, or lying down. She also recently recovered from an upper respiratory tract infection. On physical exam, you see horizontal nystagmus. She can walk without assistance. So the proper terminology that we use for her condition based on this clinical case scenario is vertigo. So there are known causes of vertigo, central and peripheral, like in the chart several slides ago, some central causes of vertigo are migraine, ******, tumors, multiple sclerosis, drugs, and for peripheral causes, there's BPPV, which is benign paroxysmal positional vertigo, labyrinthitis, Meniere's disease, vestibulitis, and something to remember again with central causes of vertigo is nystagmus does not extinguish and is not suppressed with fixation, whereas in peripheral vertigo it normally extinguishes and is suppressed with fixation here is a good diagram for you to look at again you're going to be getting a lot of this in your anatomy and neurology lectures however this diagram is the vestibular system and how this works in some of the pathways ways. You can see it's pretty complex. The peripheral causes are a little bit easier to identify than the central causes, but I'll let you go through this. So the vestibular system, when we think about it, we try to control eye movement, and several ways that we do that is through fixation, vestibulo-ocular reflexes, and also the coordination as well. so vestibular ocular what you do is you have a patient look at an object while turning their head and have them fixate on that and the vestibular balance what they do is they look at a tv while they're running on a treadmill and they should be able to do that fixation itself what this does is test to see if the nystagmus extinguishes what you do is you give the patient a focal point picture on paper light an object that is stationary and not moving the peripheral nystagmus it will extinguish on the central nystagmus this will not extinguish vestibular ocular reflex so this again is patient fixates on your fingers you put them that your finger in front of their head their face so they can look at it they turn their head from side to side their eyes should maintain fixation on your finger or on the object with smooth tracking it's a lateral failure with peripheral vertigo and there's intact with central vertigo some things we do is Romberg testing however you have to remember that Romberg testing may be positive in both peripheral and central vertigo another thing is the gait should be normal and peripheral vertigo again should be hearing you might hear the patient might hear tinnitus or roaring or there might be a partial loss of hearing in peripheral normally in central there's usually a total hearing loss that's seen some mnemonics that are used in practice and these were again on the previous lecture some of these that you'll be using in the emergency department in clinic. One is the attest. This one's kind of nice. It's associated symptoms, timing, triggers, examination signs, and testing. The things we try to do are to try to decrease health care costs and also reduce the amount of unnecessary testing on patients. And this is why this test was developed. There's certain steps used to determine if acute dizziness is related to vertigo. Then we do a hints exam. A hints exam you'll actually use often in the clinic as well. This is head impulse testing, nystagmus, and test of skew. Once the diagnosis of vertigo is given, then you do this to decrease neuroimaging. So clinical case number two, we have a 75 -year-old female with a past medical history of hypertension who's presenting with complaint of dizziness. Symptoms began suddenly this morning shortly after waking and has persisted for several hours she now comes to you saying that she has some associated nausea her son must assist her in walking due to the dizziness and she also has a great fear that she will fall on physical exam nystagmus is present and with fixation it extinguishes the vestibular ocular reflex is intact she has poor stability poor with eyes open or closed hearing is unaffected diagnosis is actually ****** so next state case we have a 50 year old female with completed dizziness that began several hours in the day and is worsened over the past several hours she is fearful that she will fall due to the symptoms however she can walk without assistance she complains with nausea and nemesis. Of note, she had an upper respiratory tract infection last week. Her vitals are normal. On vestibular testing, she has nystagmus that's present and extinguishes with fixation. Her vestibular ocular reflex is abnormal. When her eyes are closed, her postural stability is poor. When her eyes are open, her posture stability is okay and her hearing is normal. Diagnosis for this is vestibulitis. So what is vestibulitis? Well most of the time when you think about a vestibulitis attack in a patient that's usually abrupt an onset and it usually peaks over 24 hours but it can last for quite some time, weeks, months. It's almost described as sort of a Bell's palsy to a cranial nerve 8. Treatment for this, corticosteroids and antivirals. A lot of vestibular symptoms are going to be treated with corticosteroids and antivirals even though there may not be some good evidence in it and some of it lacks efficacy. What we try to do is we try to limit symptomatic treatment as this may prolong the symptoms, believe it or not. The brain eventually extinguishes the input from cranial nervate on the affected side and vestibulitis resolves. In clinical case number four, we have a 40-year-old female who's presenting complaining of the room spinning. This started as she was reaching for a bowl off the top shelf. Symptoms last for less than a minute and this area is also accompanied by nausea and emesis no symptoms while sitting very still however they do occur after changing in her position she walks into the exam room unassisted so first thing we look at her vitals there's a reason why they're called vitals they are very vital then we go and we look at nystagmus and it is present on vestibular testing fixation extinguishes the nystagmus. Vestibular ocular reflex is normal. Postural stability is bad with the eye closed and okay with the eyes open. Hearing is normal. So in this case, we have a scenario wherein we would do what they call the *** -Hallpike maneuver, and we'll get to that in the next slide here. On this test, it is positive. The *** Hall-Pike test is positive. Symptoms last less than one minute. No movement, no symptoms. So diagnosis for this is BPPV. So benign paroxysmal positional vertigo. On this right here, you have to remember that diagnosis of history is super important and as a matter of fact the history will give you the diagnosis for BPPV. Symptoms again last less than a minute and are usually occur after movement. Patients commonly when they get out of bed in the morning and turn their head they'll start to feel as though the world is spinning around them. You'll have several patients that come into your clinic or in the emergency department and when you perform the dick's Hall Pike maneuver they feel as though they're going to fall off the the gurney or the exam room table and in all reality they're lying there and there is it's pretty impossible to fall off the table while you are holding them in that position this this bppv is treated with the epley maneuver so what we do is we instruct patients to perform the maneuver at home pending safety we want to make sure they're safe while they're doing this at home we can send them to vestibular rehabilitation through wherein physical therapists are trained to do this type of rehabilitation. You can give them a first generation antihistamine like meclizine and sometimes this necessitates a referral to otolaryngology or ear, nose, and throat. This is often caused by a free floating otoconia or calcium carbonate crystal that has been dislodged most commonly involving the posterior semicircular canal. So why was the vestibular ocular reflex normal during this test? Well, you think about it, it involves the semicircular canals, and this test is testing the vestibular nerve, and the canals really are involved in the vestibular ocular reflex. dick's Hall Pike was positive because it does involve the semicircular canals. Keep in mind, though, that even though this is positive for BPPV, this could also be positive in vestibulitis as the nerve cannot carry accurate information. Remember that while the patient will be happy to undergo Epley's maneuver as will help BPPV, they will not appreciate this maneuver during and if it is a vestibulitis. Here's a picture of the *** Hall-Pike maneuver that you'll be performing in clinic. You'll have the patient sit up straight and have their head turn 45 degrees with wide open. Then you're going to aid them lying down and bringing their head back towards that same degree. And you'll actually stay there for one to two minutes with the ear pointed toward the ground. While in this position, make sure you're checking the patient's eyes. If you notice dystagmus, this is a pretty good indication that that side of the head is affected. The side of the ears, the ear that's pointed towards the ground is usually the affected side of those semicircular canals. Clinical case number five we have a 58 year old male presenting again complaining of dizziness. He states that he has had symptoms like this in the past but however he did not seek medical attention. He does have nausea and vomiting with a lower roar in his right ear. He says that this has been persistent for several hours now. He walks into the office unassisted. On vital signs, you notice that the pulse is slightly elevated. However, the remainder of the vital signs are normal. He does have associated nystagmus. Vestibular testing, well, on fixation, his nystagmus extinguishes. Vestibular ocular reflex is abnormal. For posture stability, it's poor with eyes closed and okay with eyes open. His hearing is decreased on the right. Diagnosis for this would be Meniere's disease, and another name for this is endolymphatic hydrops. Meniere's disease, you have to remember, is the classic triad of three things. It's the episodic vertigo, tinnitus, and hearing loss. Whenever you think or hear of those three things, you have to think about Meniere's disease. This is due to increased fluid in the labyrinth system, the inner ear. There's also Meniere's syndrome that's a little bit different because it's the symptom or the triad of vertigo, tinnitus, and hearing loss, but it's secondary to other ear disorders. Normally, when you see Meniere's disease, it's going to be in patients between 20 to 40 years of age. However, it does range a little bit further than this. I've seen some patients with Meniere's disease all the way into their 50s and 60s. Unfortunately, with Meniere's disease, it does take a while for them to be diagnosed. If you think about it, they come in, they're having vertigo, and they're also having a little bit of hearing loss. Some physicians may mistakenly diagnose this as BPPV. They'll be sent to vestibular rehab. they'll be started on meclizine, and their symptoms may improve, they may not. Because of this, they can go through several rounds of, hey, this is vertigo associated with BPPV, until they finally get the accurate diagnosis of Meniere's disease. Some tests that you can do are audiometry, vestibular testing, and MRICT of the temporal bones. Here's a good picture of endolymphatic high drops, and what it looks like in normal and an abnormal vestibular system. You can see that there's a lot more fluid in figure B than there is in figure A. This is causing distortion and distention of the membranous and the lymphatic containing portions of the labyrinth system. The differential diagnosis, and again like I said this is why it is very difficult for patients to be diagnosed with Meniere's, is because there's quite a few things that they may get diagnosed with erroneously first. Acoustic neuromas, multiple sclerosis, otosclerosis, diabetes, thyroid disease, anemia. There's autoimmune inner ear disease. There's syphilitic endolymphatic hydrops, BPPVs on there, TIAs, tumors. So there's quite a bit to go through. Treatment for Meniere's disease is actually quite fascinating. The first thing, of course is diet and lifestyle adjustments. Try to reduce the amount of sodium and caffeine and alcohol in the patient's diet. Try to minimize stress and anxiety. Avoid environmental allergies. Less insult to the ear, the better. Some patients are even placed on diuretics. I'd actually go out on a limb and say most patients are placed on them because this does help with their symptoms. Diuretics include hydrochlorothiazide, triamterine, furosemide, and acetazolamide. In acute episodic attacks, some patients are using clonazepam and diazepam for this, and because this leads to some nausea, as our clinical case scenario identified, anti-emetics are often used, such as Zofran and Phenergan. Treatment, you know, well, you can think about systemic or intratympanic glucocorticoids if they're not responding to pharmacotherapy. There's intratypanic gentamicin that destroys the hair cells as well that's sometimes used. And if that doesn't work, then they go and they do a labyrinthectomy and a vestibular anorectomy. Important points to know about the vestibular system before we go into the auditory system is symptoms last than one minute. So symptoms that if they're less than one minute, they go away quickly, but then they come back with movement of the head, usually start to think about BPPV. If symptoms last for hours, think about Meniere's, ******, or TIA. They last for days, then vestibulitis, mass, or CVA. Inability to walk, that's usually central. Does not extinguish, usually central. Vestibular ocular reflex abnormal is usually peripheral vertigo. dick's Hall pie can be positive and more than BPPV and remember history history history it is so important listen to your patients because they are telling you the diagnosis now let's talk about the auditory system and some of its basics here now you're gonna be getting auditory pathology and also anatomy in general of what the auditory system looks like this is just the general picture from Morse Clinical Anatomy showing you that it is complex, the auditory system, and there's a lot to it. We went through the vestibular system which is the inner ear portion that shows where the cochlea, the semicircular canals, that anatomy is at, but now we're gonna go through the auditory, sensory neural, and conductive hearing loss. So conductive hearing loss, there's some things that lead to that. Number one would be cerumen impaction. There's also infections in the external and internal ear. There's congenital causes, otosclerosis, and trauma that can all lead to conductive hearing loss. Sensual neural is usually due to congenital again, medications, age-related or presbycusis tumors and illnesses here is a table showing you some of the causes of hearing loss so when a patient comes into your clinic you want to start at the top say hearing loss and the first thing that's there is history then you go through an otologic examination and whether it's abnormal or normal and go all the way through the algorithm until you find your diagnosis now sometimes you might get to the very end of the algorithm and the diagnosis does not fit the clinical scenario so they have to go back through and refine it here are some common causes of hearing loss that are genetic hereditary hearing impairment genes all the way to syndromic hereditary hearing impairment genes as you can see there are quite a few of them one thing to keep in mind that again that it is a very complex system and Some patients will need to be referred out to geneticists or even when you refer to an olaryngologist, they get a geneticist involved as well. When you evaluate hearing loss, the first goal of evaluation is to determine the nature of hearing impairment, whether it's sensorineural or conductive, the severity of the impairment, the anatomy, and the etiology. You get a good history, start the physical exam, you start external and go internal try to avoid irrigation of the ears during your exam if possible because this can skew your results and then there's special testing the written Weber tests this is using a 512 Hertz tuning fork autological audiological assessments pneumoscopy is also used this is interesting as if when you do pneumoscopy if the tympanic membrane is non-mobile you usually think that this could be due to fluid or mass in the middle air cavity or if it's also stiff or sclerotic it could lead to that as well hypermobile tm you think about oscular chain disruption if the tm only moves with negative pressure then they have a blocked eustachian tube you could do temporal bone ct scans mris you could do laboratory analysis as well some things you do through blood work would be glucose checking for diabetes cbc with differential anemia leukemia lymphoma thyroid studies you do an rpr looking for ******** syphilitic causes of hearing loss and also an a profile which would check for autoimmune illnesses here's a good picture of the weber and rin test The Weber test, you use the tuning fork towards the forehead or the top of the head there, whereas the rim test, you actually use towards the mastoid bone, and you're testing for air conduction. Good table to the side here. Now, these tests can get very confusing for not only physicians, but also medical students. I encourage you to take a look at this table here and decipher out hair conduction, bone conduction, which table leads to which diagnosis or which line. One good thing to start with is you start with the Weber test, and then you do the RIN. You have to do both of them together. Again, here it says you must use results from both Weber and RIN testing. And this, I'm going to go through several examples here to kind of help solidify this and answer any questions that you have. Because, like, again, it is confusing. So, example one, when you do Weber testing, if it lateralizes to the right, RIN is positive bilaterally. Weber, well, it may mean conductive hearing loss on the right or sensorineural loss on the left. Whereas, RIN, air conduction is greater than bone conduction on both sides. so no conductive hearing loss. This suggests left-sided sensorial neural loss. Another example would be this. Weber lateralizes to the right. RIN is negative on the right. Weber, either conductive hearing loss on the right or sensorial neural loss on the left. When you do RIN, air conduction is less than bone conduction on the right and it suggests the right-sided conductive hearing loss. Example three would be Weber has no lateralization and RIN is positive bilaterally. On Weber testing, this could be either physiological or bilateral conductive or bilateral sensor or neural hearing loss. And RIN, where air conduction is greater than bone conduction bilaterally, normally suggest either normal or bilateral equal central neural hearing loss. one last thing i want to touch base on before we conclude our lecture is tinnitus this affects a lot of people in the u.s alone in fact about 50 million people in the u.s have chronic tinnitus the hard thing about tinnitus is it can be subjective or objective and you have to get a good history again from the patient to determine the etiology of tinnitus to them Some of the theories of this cause is loss of cochlear input to the central auditory system, loss of suppressive neural connections. Some people have heard of phantom pain. They're thinking that may be one of the causes. And then also abnormalities in serotonin levels in the auditory cortex, causing aberrant neural firing. There are several etiologies of tinnitus, one being ototoxicity, hypertension, diabetes, bone disease, ******, tumors, multiple sclerosis, medications. Patients often need to be referred to ENT when tinnitus is pulsatile, unilateral, or if there's sudden hearing loss, dizziness, or facial pain. If this isn't present, further testing is not usually needed. The treatment for it is to remove the offending cause, CBT, masking, and also electrical stimulation of the cochlea. One of the common medications that lead to tinnitus in some people is aspirin. So when someone comes in, they're having a lot of ringing in their ears. Ask them, are you taking any aspirin? And a large majority may be. Biggest thing with hearing loss and pathology thereof is prevention. If you can prevent it, you're going to be saving your patients a lot of grief. Some ways to prevent it is, number one, if someone comes in with an ear infection, prompt antibiotic therapy for otitis media, for example, or use some tympanostomy tubes when indicated. Some children actually have hearing loss due to untreated ear infections. Another thing is making sure that when you're using aminoglycosides that you're monitoring peak serum peak and trough levels and avoiding loud noises and wearing hearing protection this is a big one try to wear hearing protection when you're at concerts using firearms leaf blowers chainsaws headphones and so forth so important points of the auditory system would be history is vastly important conductive versus sensorineural hearing loss weber and rind testing must be interpreted together again they must be interpreted together you can't have one without the other and have an accurate diagnosis and then again further testing or imaging may be required after special testing here are some references and go ahead and read through those and you can click on some of the links there that will take you to where we pulled some of this information and again my contact information is here please feel free to either email texts or call for exact dates when i'm in office if you want to do a zoom meeting and we'll go from there thank you again for your attention and again if you have any questions or concerns please let me know