My name is Gonzalo Tazu, and today I will be talking about the neuroanatomy of olfaction and taste. We'll describe the cellular organization of the human olfactory and gustatory systems. We'll explain how afferent, afferent, afferent, efferent in both senses contribute to the communication between the sensory epithelia and the brain. We'll explain a little bit about the specific brain related to the complexity of smell and taste sensation. We'll compare and contrast both systems and we'll also talk about specific disease states. Olfaction. So this is one of the chemical senses and um and it's there's importance and clinical importance for this for example uh parkinson patients show olfactory deficit for example four years before showing any motor symptoms so it's important for us to understand the physiology of olfaction So the human olfaction, briefly, we have molecules in the air, and these molecules enter in contact with olfactory epithelium, where they are sensory neurons, and that information is transmitted into the olfactory bulb and from the olfactory bulb into the rest of the brain. There are two routes for olfaction. One is the one that you probably are thinking about, where the odors enter through the nose, and we call the ortonasal, where the odors enter into the nasal cavity and make contact. However, it's also for humans, it's very important, the retronasal, where the food that we have ingested from the mouth, the volatile molecules enter into the nasal cavity and also make contact. And this retronasal is very important for the sensation of flavor, which is the combination of taste and olfaction produced by the food that we eat. So what happens in the olfactory epithelium is we have in here on the lower part, we can see the epithelium where the other molecules are going to make contact. there they are going to we're going to find the olfactory receptive cells we have this cilia where the olfactory receptors are actually located so we are going to have some sensation here so there is also going to be the Bowman gland that's going to be producing this mucus which is very important for the normal function of olfaction and there also to be these basal cells so the olfactory cells are these first order bipolar neurons also known as olfactory neurosensory cells or primary olfactory neurons they have dendrites with specialized cilia these neurons are short-lived they only live for seven days and so processes that affect cell division will also affect olfaction in particular chemotherapy now here we have also basal cells which are stem cells that are going to give rise to the olfactory receptor cells so the olfactory receptor cells require the support of other cells so there are the the sustentacular cells, which have microbillus and secretory glandulans. They also produce mucus, and they provide structural stability to the olfactory epithelium. They are also the cells that are associated with the Bowman glands here, and they secrete the mucus fluid containing glycoprotein. So, the importance of these sustentacular cells have been emphasized in later years. As it turns out, the sustentacular cells express the ACE2 receptor, which actually is used by the COVID -19 virus to enter into the epithelium. So, as it turns out, the olfactory receptor cells do not express this receptor, so the virus is entering into the body through the sustentacular cells. So, what are olfactory receptors? How does the chemical sense, chemical input, turn into electrical activity? So the olfactory receptor proteins are G protein copper receptors, and they bind an array of odorants. We humans have only 300 olfactory receptor genes. Compared to other species, for example mice that depend much more on olfaction, they have a higher number of olfactory receptor G1200. When a molecule binds to these olfactory receptors, a receptor other incompletes form, which activates the G protein. This triggers a cascade of second messengers that causes opening of cation channels of sodium, potassium, and calcium that they are going to enter into the cell, the calcium influx causes the opening of these calcium -gated chloride channels. Opening the chloride channels causes depolarization of an olfactory receptor neuron, and it's going to amplify the receptor potential. This potential spreads to the trigger zone of the receptor neuron and initiates the action potential. So the olfactory nerve is the cranial nerve number one. So the unmelinated actions of the olfactory cells gather into about 20 bundles. So these that are going to be on one side on the olfactory epithelium separated by a bone from the olfactory bulb. They have to traverse through this bone, which is in the clippiform plane in the ethmoid bone. So these fibers have to cross through the bone to reach the olfactory bulb and they are going to make synapses creating structures in the olfactory bulb called the glomerulus. So here we have another diagram where we can see this with more clarity. So here we have the nasal cavity and here in this part you can see the ethmoid bone and the cribiform plate where the bundles of nerve fibers are going to cross here's another detail what this is of the anterior fossa and the cribiform plate where we can see the little holes on one side is the olfactory epithelium and on the other side is the olfactory bulb so it is actually quite interesting what happens in the olfactory bulb so as we said we have 300 different olfactory receptor genes each of the olfactory receptor neurons express only one of these genes and what is interesting is that they are distributed all over the olfactory epithelium However, when they cross into the olfactory bulb, all the axons that are coming from neurons that express the same olfactory receptor are going to converge into one single structure, which is called the olfactory bulb, the olfactory glomerulus. So we are going to have glomerulus are going to have axons from receptor neurons that express a single receptor gene. How is the odor produced by an object in the environment encoded? So it is not the case that each olfactory receptor is going to respond to a single object. but each receptor bind to, can bind to multiple objects, and it's going to be actually which combination of olfactory receptors that is activated that's going to determine the identity of another. For example, here in this graph we have some e that represent the olfactory bulb and then you can see here some cartoon of the glomerular at these little circles and the active in the bulb bread produces this combination of receptors that are being activated we can see that and then wine will have for example a different pattern so then we'll if we see this pattern of glomerular being activated then we'll know that it's wine and so on and this information is going to be transported to the olfactory cortex. So this is an example where we can use optical techniques to image the activity in the olfactory bulb. This is from a recent paper from my laboratory where we image the responses in the olfactory bulb to a chemical ethyl butyrate. so here you can see that there's air so there's no activity and then you can see these dark spots appearing this corresponds to activated glomeruli and the combination of this glomeruli determines the identity of the other so here for example we can see different maps that are produced by different chemicals. So, which combination of olfactory glomeruli is produced by an odor is going to determine the identity of the odor, and the brain has to decode that activity. So, you talk about the glomeruli. Now, in the olfactory bulb, that information has to reach the rest of the brain so we have the glomeruli are conducted by the dendrites of the mitral and the tufted cells and these cells constitute the output of the olfactory bulb and transmit the olfactory information to other parts of the brain so this activity is actually regulated there are interneurons, that is neurons that release the inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA in the olfactory bulb. These are the granule cells and the periglomerular cells. These cells receive feedback input from other brain areas for all these centrifugal fibers. Also they receive input from the raffin nucleus and from the nucleus structure coriolis. So these inputs are going to modulate these internators, which in turn will modulate the output of the olfactory bulb. So the olfactory tracts are the fiber tracts that carry the information from the olfactory bulb to other parts of the brain. Again, they are formed by the axon of the mitral and the tufted cells, so these olfactory tracts expand at the olfactory trigo, which is this anatomical structure. So there is a lateral and a medial strial. The lateral tract is the main output of the olfactory ball, and it's going to project to the primary olfactory cortex. The medial olfactory stria are going to cross to the other side of the brain and make contact to another structure called the anterior olfactory nucleus so the anterior olfactory nucleus receives input from one glomerulus which receives input from one nostril and it's going to receive the input from the other nostril so there's going to be a comparison from both nostrils and that can be used it's uh it has been speculated that it might have to do for other localization So here, this you will see more clearly when you're in the anatomy lab. So we have the olfactory bulb, and then there's the olfactory tract. And the olfactory tract is going to connect to the olfactory tubercle, which is part of this olfactory cortex. This is also going to connect to the periphone cortex, which is the main recipient of the output of the olfactory bulb. and other parts that receive olfactory input include the periamidaloid cortex as well as the para -hippocampal gyrus which is part of the entorhinal cord so there is also an olfactor as we mentioned before there is also the uh um the anterior olfactory nucleus which connects the two olfactory bulbs and there is the piriform cortex which is the main recipient of the lateral olfactory tract the piriform cortex is part of the limbic system and connects to the entorhinal cortex to the dorsal entorhinal area as well as to the amygdala something that is worth mentioning is that olfaction is different from under sensory modalities in that there does not exist an olfactory thalamus however people uh the piriform cortex projects this primary piriform cortex the primary olfactory cortex projects to the mediodorsal thalamic nucleus and people consider that there and in the mediodorsal thalamic nucleus you are going to find neurons that respond to others and these mediodorsal thalamic nucleus sends projections to the insular cortex as we'll see later this is where gustatory inputs also go so here we have an integration of smell and taste which is going to produce the sensation of flavor it also projects to the orbit orbitofrontal cortex So it's going to relate to the process of reward and motivation. Interestingly, we saw that there is this beautiful structure in the olfactory bulb called the glomeruli, where the axons of the olfactory receptor neuron that express the same gene converge. However, this structure disappears in the piriform cortex. Here you are seeing in vivo imaging in the piriform cortex, and here in red represents the activation of the neurons that are activated by an individual odor. So, you would have expected that the structure of glomeruli will be maintained in the piriform cortex. However, that structure is lost, and others are represented by distributed populations of neurons in the piriform cortex. The exact reason of that is unknown. So, there are olfactory disorders. and olfactory disorders can be quantitative so here for example we have sensitivity and a normosmic person is a person that has normal self sensation people that have decreased smell sensation are described as hyposmic and an anosmic is a person that has a complete absence of smell sensation so anosmia affects 3 .2 percent of u.s adults who are aged more than 40 years so that's a population of 3.4 million people so the uh anosmia is a large problem that affects a large number of people and the number of people that are affected by anosmia increases with age So between 14 and 22 percent of people over 60 and older are anosmic. The most common causes are synonasal diseases, post-infectious disorders, and post -traumatic disorders. So we'll talk about that a little bit more in more detail. And other etiologies, congenital idiopathic toxic disorders or disorders caused by neurodegenerative disease are less common. So besides the quantitative olfactory disorder, there are also qualitative olfactory disorders. So these are divided in two types. One is the parosmia, when the stimulus is real but elicits a false sensation. For example, baby powder, a very nice and pleasant smell, is going to smell like, for these people with parosmias, as burned paper. And very common, actually, is that people, for some reason, coffee is one of these stimulus that has caused trouble in parosmias, if people describe, for example, that coffee smells like gasoline. not surprisingly the vast majority of patients describe these parosmic experiences as unpleasant it's even more unpleasant than being anosmic and interestingly these parosmias are associated with initially with a loss of olfactory function so somebody starts with an anosmia and a hyposmia and later on is going to develop these parosmias. Interestingly, and something that you will see in your clinical practice, is that the parosmia, there's an increase in the number of parosmias induced after the COVID -19 infection induced anosmia, which affects 7.1% of these patients. Another word that is used to describe the parosmia is gacostmia, But in that case, the term is used when the perceived smell is foul. So, besides this parosmia, there are phantosmia, when there is no actual physical smell. However, there is a random sensation of a smell in the absence of stimulus. The parosmias are not associated with a loss of falstery function. And as we'll see later on, they can be produced, for example, by epileptic seizure in the uncus, that is the part close where the pitiform cortex is located. So there are other syndromes that are characterized by a smell being affected and are very characteristic. One of them is the Kalman syndrome, which is a hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, so there's a lack of pituitary hormones, LH and FSH, which results in the late puberty, and these people also have anosmia. Another clinic syndrome that also can be presented with hyposmia is the Foster -Kennedy syndrome where there is a meningioma of the olfactory groove which compresses the olfactory tract and the optic nerve. It results in ipsilateral anosmia and the optic nerve atrophy and possibly contralateral papillus. So there is, as we age, our sense of male is going to deteriorate with normal aging. However, there's also neurodegenerative diseases like Parkinson's or Alzheimer's disease, where there is an accelerated loss of olfaction. an important cause of anosmia could be trauma so as we saw the fibers from the olfactory the nerves from the olfactory epithelium have to cross this cribiform plate to reach the olfactory bulb so if there is trauma to the head then there could be a fracture of the floor of the anterior cranial fossa in this case the crib is going to be affected so these uh fibers these nerves are going to be disturbed number one and it will result in an osmia and csf rhenorrhea and another cause of of that another olfactory dysfunction could be this unzeny fits where an individual is going to repair before getting an epileptic seizure is going to report auras of foul smelling odors just before the seizure onset the pitiform area is very susceptible to generate seizures and partial complex epilepsy can generate it can be originated in this medial temporal focus in the ancus, and then that will produce these auras of smells preceding the onset of the seizure. Allergia renatis can also be caused by lateral liposmia. Interestingly, when people have looked at biopsies of the olfactory mucosa, you can see that the sensory epithelial cells are still present, but their cilia are all deformed and shortened and are buried under other mucosal cells. Besides is more peripheral forms of causes of olfactory losses this interestingly in the Korsakov psychosis there is also a hypostomia so what happens is that in Korsakov psychosis there is damage to the diencephalon right like the mammillary bodies but also into the medial talamic nucleus So, as you remember, people with alcohol use disorder can have a deficiency in vitamin B1, and there's going to be problems with memory and co-fabulation. But also, anosmia might be present, and it's thought to be caused by the degeneration of the neurons in the higher-order olfactory systems, including the mediodorsal nucleus of the talibus. So this is actually quite interesting because it's a more central cause for an olfactory dysfunction. So let's review the olfactory pathway. So the odorants in the environment travel via orto and retronasal and activate the olfactory receptors. These olfactory receptors and neurons are in the mucosa, and the fibers cross through the cribiform plane into the olfactory bulb. There, the olfactory bulb, we find the mitral and the tufted cells, the two main output cells of the olfactory bulb. These olfactory bulb cells then project to other areas, including the piriform cortex, the anterior olfactory nucleus, the amygdala, and the entorhinal cortex. So, now let's talk about taste. So, taste refers to the activation by chemicals of the receptors in our mouth, in the tongue. So, there are 5 by 6 sensations of taste, sweet, bitter, salty, sour, and umami. uh you are probably you are familiar you're probably familiar familiar with the first four umami is a japanese word for the pleasant savory taste so you can imagine that in uh soy sauce cheese and uh ripped tomatoes and it's produced by glutamate and nucleotides that are going to cause this umami taste sensation. So the sensation of taste is going to be located in the taste buds, which are the sensory organs of the taste system. So the taste buds, which are these groups of sensory neurons, you can see that the taste cells look kind of similar to the olfactor receptor neurons they have the micro billy and there's this aperture where you can the chemicals are going to come in and these cells are also in general these sensory neurons that are exposed to all these chemical sensors have short lives same here and there's also basal cells so there's going to be renewal of these cell of the tail cells. So these tail cells are located on the papillae, which are the protrusions on the surface of the tongue, you can see them, and they are different, they have different forms, they are filiform, fungiform, foliate, and syncunvalate papillae. The filiform and the fungiform papillae are scattered through the surface of the anterior two-thirds of the tongue, especially along the lateral margins so we'll talk about the what chemicals or what aspects of the chemical work is going to be reported by the different and these receptors. So salt is actually going to be reporting the content of sodium in food through the ameliorate -sensitive sodium channels. So the gastrointestinal receptor neurons are going to have channels that are going to let sodium in. And that way we are going to be able to tell if the content of salt in our food the polarization of the membrane so sodium goes in the membrane depolarizes and opens voltage activated calcium channels to amplify this activation and this calcium triggers the release of synaptic vesicles and are going to activate degustatory afferent axis. For SAUR, so this is going to be our body's pH sensor, our TONGS pH sensor. They are going to detect the protons and it's mediated by the closure of voltage -dependent potassium channels. The polarization of the membrane again opens voltage activity in calcium channels and the calcium again triggered the release of inactive vesicles activating gustatory afferent access so now uh so so far the two sensations uh sour and salty were were directly activated channels now the sweet and bitter are actually slightly different they are going to be using g-protein copper receptors. Sweet taste is mediated by activation of the g-proteins and adenylate cyclase which is going to increase the levels of cyclic adenosine monophosphate producing membrane depolarization. Bitter substances are going to activate a g-protein that activates phospholipase C and generate ip3 producing calcium release from internal stores so because we are using g protein capital receptors there's going to be as you are aware an amplification of the signal and that actually starts to make sense if we think that we want to be able to detect very low levels of bitter substances in the natural world bitter substances is a warning from plants telling us that they are toxic so we want to be able to detect that and that's why we have this very sensitive system using g protein coupled this receptor to detect bitterness we have over 30 different bitter receptors animals that are herbivores have even more because they have they are eating this all these plants and plants are telling us don't eat us we are toxic how how is taste transmitted to the to the central nervous system so there's innervation through clinal nerve number seven nine and ten taste buds on the anterior two -thirds of the tongue are innervated by the facial nerve clinal nerve number seven now the taste buds on the posterior one -third of the tongue are innervated by the glossopharyngeal nerve clinal nerve number nine And the taste buds on the epiglottis and pharyngeal walls are innervated by the Bagels nerve, cranial nerve number 10. All this gastratory information is going to converge in the rostral valve of the nucleus of the solitary tract in the dorsal medulla, which is here, close to the fore ventricle. So, remember that in olfaction, there is no olfactory thalamus properly, however, in gas station there is a gastatory thalamus. So as we mentioned before, we have the nucleus, the gastatory part in the nucleus of the solitary tract. these fibers close to the fore ventricle is going to ascend through the solitary thalamic tract and is going to converge to the posterior medial nucleus of the thalamus to the ventral posterior medial nucleus of the thalamus the bpm and the bpm is the gastratory thalamus the gastatory thalamus is going to send projections to the primary gastatory cortex which is located in the insula so the insula is going is where the gastatory cortex is located so the solitary tract nucleus cells respond broadly here to a wide variety of different tasting substances whereas the gastric cortex responses are much more narrow here right you can see that this cell in the solitary tract nucleus responds to multiple substances whereas the gastric cortex this example cell is only responding to glucose so when the gastric system is affected we got that adjusia and there are multiple conditions that could affect that heavy smoking is one of them so people have actually made sure that indeed smokers have higher thresholds to detect salt acid sucrose or kinene um given the location of the innervation in the anterior two-thirds of the tongue by by facial nerve in case of both palsy there's also going to be a lot of gestation on that part. And chemoradiotherapy in the head and neck, for example, can affect the cranial nerves that transmit gestatory information. So the olfactory nerve, cranial nerve 1, consists of sensory neurons that synapse in the olfactory bone. Cranial nerve number 1 carries only one single modality, is a special visceral average. There is no incoming precortical relay of olfactory information in the thalamus. Then the olfactory information travels via the mediodorsal nucleus of the thalamus to the insula followed by the orbitofrontal cortex. Neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease are often accompanied by hyposmia and remember that each taste bad harbors all five varieties of non -neuronal sensory cells that are connected to canal nerve 7, 9, or 10. So here we have some practice questions. Neurodegeneration as seen in Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease often causes a noticeable decline in odor sensitivity. This phenomenon is best described as anosmia, kakosmia, hyposmia, parosmia, or phantosmia. As this is just a decline in odor sensitivity and not a complete absence of odor sensitivity, this is an hyposmia. Question number 2. A 15-year-old girl with a family history of Benin meningiomas presents with left -sided absence of smell sensation and contralateral papilledema. She points out that her symptoms worsen over time. Her most likely diagnosis is cacostomia and senate epileptic seizure, gripe from plane fracture, early onset Parkinson's disease, Foster -Kennedy syndrome, or Kalman syndrome. Given that she has that combination of smell and a papilledema probably caused by a meningioma compressing the optic nerve and affecting the olfactory tract. Question number three. A 15-year-old girl who has been unable to smell any odors since Bert presents to her pediatrician with a complaint that she is not developing any secondary *** characteristics which would have been otherwise expected for her age. Her diagnosis is consistent with congenital compression of the olfactory groove, early onset Alzheimer's disease, Foster-Kennedy syndrome, Kalman syndrome, and synod epilepsy. Given the absence or delay of puberty and the anosmia this is a clear case so this is something that is relatively not recent now it's about the tropisms of of the SARS-CoV-2 the virus that caused COVID-19 so this was a study done in cadavers where people were looking for uh rna copies of the virus and interestingly it was found mostly in the olfactory mucosa so that would explain the i know the anosmia or hyposmia produced by kobe 19 by kobe 19 but also it also found in the middle of long gata so here remember that's where the place where we have the nucleus of the solitary tract where gastrointestinal information is being received. So the tropism of this SARS-CoV-2, so which parts of the brain are affected, might explain how the chemical cancers are affected in COVID-19. And thank you very much for your attention.