hello everyone welcome to my lecture the limbic system let's get started in this lecture we're going to cover the basic anatomy and the cellular circuitry of the limbic system the major important structures are singular gyrus hippocampal formation and amygdala so we are also going to touch on different kinds of memory disorders as well as other clinical syndromes associated with limbic system pathology please be sure to see the detailed objectives in cpg as well as the scholar rex break for the complex blueprint you can see the information that's highly relevant to limbic system is amnesia, Wernicke-Korsakoff encephalopathy, learning disorders, and symptoms related to trauma and stress like PTSD. On the USMLE blueprint, as usual, there are normal processes and abnormal processes. So for normal processes, we know limbic systems are highly related to emotional behavior regulation and for an abnormal processes it's highly related to anxiety disorders mood disorders so very important content here the limbic system this name coming from latin limbus so limbus means border which is you can see here the bordering between the cerebrum cortex and the diencephalon so you can see the structure here like a ring forming the limbic system so the limbic system is a core it's a list of structures that provide very primitive or like a fundamental human type of feeling emotional processing and so it's regulating the hypothalamus and autonomic output and these emotional regulation structures are really the composition is under debate and we have a big three so big three meaning the three biggest structures that everybody agrees upon so if you ask about the limbic system everybody would say these three structures the cingulate gyrus which is here cingulate and the hippocampus here as well as amygdala so these three structures has always been considered as a part of limbic system and there are a bunch of other areas you can see here long list and they're also around this borderline between the cerebrum and the diencephalon including part of the hypothalamus you can see here including mammary body as well as some thalamic nuclei and part of the prefrontal cortex as well as orbital frontal cortex so the frontal cortex is also processing some emotional um personality related emotional sensation uh effective component like how we feel about ourselves as well as the insula so we haven't really talked much about insula you're going to talk about it in the uh the taste pathway so insula is also part of the like connecting very well with the limbic system but some think these structures are part of the limbic system others may not agree so but at least these big three you need to know they're part of the limbic system we're going to go through most of these structures one by one as you can see here the limbic system are connected with a lot of systems but overall they receive the sensor information from the body you know like from the sensory regions of the somatic information or reticular formation comes into the limbic structures they all also receive information sensory information from the cortex and so all these inputs being summarized and to produce one major output to the hypothalamus So through the hypothalamus, it's going to regulate our autonomic functions to change the functions of our body, usually unconsciously. The functions of the limbic system can be summarized very nicely into five Fs. So these five Fs are feeding, fleeing, fighting, feeling, and ***. So basically all kinds of, you know, conscious functions of the cerebral cortex is linked with the unconscious autonomic functions of the brainstem. For example, here you can see the Indiana Jones, you know, when the actor sees the rattlesnake, you can see the scared expression on the face and then this lady obviously is angry and then you know on the right this is the plurible sensation during *** right so all of these are highly related to the limbic system function another function is about the memory storage and retrieval so very important for human beings in the literature sometimes you can see a term called limbic lobe so this lobe usually referring to the singular gyrus over here together with the hippocampal gyrus as well as the medial of the frontal cortex so these structures are kind of forming into this loop buried very deep inside the brain so you won't be able to see it from the exterior you kind of have to slice the brain open you know at least from the midline you know the mid sagittal view you will be able to see this whole loop so that is our limbic lobe first let's talk about the biggest structure in the limbic system the cingulate gyrus as you can see here this blue structure pretty big cingulate gyrus wrap around the corpus callosum on both sides and it's really as acting as a gateway between the cerebral cortex and the limbic system it receives a lot of input from the cortex and thalamus and it projects to back to the previous cerebral cortex and then also to the hippocampus So we're going to talk about the circuitry later, and the main function is to really regulating the emotional aspects of the sensory perception and movement. There was an ancient surgery called the cingulatectomy, which is to destroy part of the cingulate cortex to relieve the severe anxiety and depression. as example you can see here the anterior cingulate cortex has been destroyed bilaterally by the surgeon so it's a pretty brutal surgery but it does uh relieve the psychiatric or the you know non -sensory component of the sensory information processing another example is to treat intractable pain as you can see here you know when there is a single otomy being performed then you know the patient have a quite interesting sensation so they can still feel pain that meaning their sensory pathway you know from this let's say peripheral to the spinal cord all the way up to our primary somatosensory cortex that pathway has been intact so the patient can still feel pain but it doesn't bother them anymore so that meaning the unpleasantness or affective component of the pain is gone so this meaning you know the cingulate cortex has a very important role in terms of linking that emotional sensation emotional feeling to the sensory information of our body okay knowing what we have known so far let's look at a patient's case so this patient initial ep you can look at his mr image and let's see what is the lesion and then what do you think the symptoms of this patient experiencing So the lesion is here. You can see if you recognize this, the location is the medial temporal lobe. You know, really the biggest landmark is here, right? This is our midbrain structures, right? So the medial temporal lobe right at the, you know, along the midline, those two structures has been damaged. So what do you think the symptoms the patient should be experiencing? Okay, so the damaged areas are having amygdala and hippocampus located at the medial temporal lobe. And so this patient will suffer from very profound amnesia. So it turned out this patient has a ****** simplex virus infection. So this type of herpesvirus has a special affinity to the limbic cortex. So for some reason, it's, you know, the hippocampal formation as well as amygdala has the most severe vulnerability and being damaged at first. That's why this patient suffered from severe amnesia. Now let's look at the hippocampal formation more closely. as you can see showing here the blue region this is a hippocampal formation the name of the hippocampus is actually latin meaning horse a seahorse you can see here you know the shape of the hippocampal formation looks exactly like a seahorse so very identical that's where the name comes from so we talk about the hippocampus interchangeably with the hippocampal formation even though the hippocampal formation is actually composed of three major structures including the dented gyrus hippocampus and subiculum so they're all over here but you know for our level our purposes we can use those two interchangeably just consider them as the same the hippocampal formation receives input from the interrhinocortex here you can see It's part of the perihippocampal gyrus, very close to the hippocampus. And it sends output through the fornix, which, you know, eventually reached the diencephalon hypothalamus. We're going to talk about it in more details in the following slides. So in here the hippocampus is in charge of the spatial orientation and what's interesting is that only the right hippocampus is responsible for the spatial orientation or navigation. You can see here when the London taxi driver imagining the driving around the town, only the right side of the hippocampus light up this is a more oxygen consumption in this brain region very interesting lateralization showing here the detailed hippocampal formation structure as you can see you know there are ca1 ca2 ca3 ca4 these four subdivisions forming hippocampus and you have this you know forming a c you know a letter c shape and then the dentate gyrus also forming another c uh which is the you know kind of a backwards interlocked with hippocampus and then subiculum is at the end of the hippocampus that's uh you know serving as a major output structure that's sending information out through the uh fornix and interrhino cortex is right next to subiculum sending information into our hippocampal formation so you don't need to remember all these detailed structures i do want to give your impression you can see here this is giant neuron this is one neuron that having a lot of dendrites and axons kind of you know it's one axon but a lot of dendrites that are really submitting all the information from all over the places so this type of parameter cells you can imagine takes a lot of energy to synthesize analyzing the information right so that's why they're very sensitive very sensitive to oxygen deprivation within minutes the cells of those parameter cells would be dead due to hypoxia. So this area is very sensitive. So just need to remember this, not the detailed structures. The hippocampus, as we mentioned, with the subiculum connecting with the outside, you know, sending the fibers to fimbria and then connect with fornix so this is a fornix we have this entire way and the fornix is almost like a gymnast you can see that the legs are the cruce of the fornix kind of thick right and then you have the body of the fornix kind of curved back and then you have the two arms those are the columns of the fornix. So this structure, fornix, you know, depicted here too, is actually from the medial portion of the temporal lobe, goes around this diencephalon, and then, you know, goes around the thalamus at the base of the lateral ventricle, and then comes down to the mammillary body, you know, all the way to the diencephalon, the hypothalamus structure, make a big circle here around the diencephalon. See, it's almost completely overlapping. And this is just another view showing here with, you know, this is our hippocampal formation with the hippocampus. It looks like a seahorse shape. And then you have the thimbria connecting with the fornix. So these are the legs of the fornix. And then that's a body and then comes up to the two columns of the fornix. And what is this structure? This is called anterior commissure. So anterior commissure is, you know, kind of parallel to the posterior commissure, and then parallel to the corpus callosum. So it's transforming information between the two hemispheres. You can look at different views of the relative positions of these large fibers. So here, that's the body of the fornix, that's a column. So here, you don't have a continuous column because of the slicing. And this is our corpus callosum. So you can see that's one connecting the two hemispheres. This is our anterior commissure also connecting the two hemispheres. Temporal lobe epilepsy are highly related to the medial temporal lobe like hippocampus and the amygdala so these structures are very active you know during our daily life they have a lot of neurons have lower threshold to be excited excitable that's why they're more prone for epileptic seizure the epilepsy that involves temporal lobe is called complex partial seizures or psychomotor seizures the symptoms are presented as abnormal sensations in involuntary movements such as you know repeated chewing swallowing smacking and it also in involved with some memory loss and hallucinations this is a very common type of epilepsy relatively hard to treat okay speaking of amygdala let's talk about it so amygdala is a latin name meaning almond so the shape of here you can see down here at the little blue nucleus this is amygdala the relative size of amygdala is small compared to the hippocampal formation around it and if you compare to the giant cingulate cortex this nucleus is small right so showing here on the coronal sections you can see amygdala here at the medial temporal lobe next to the hippocampal formation you can see the squiggly structure hippocampus right so basically even though it's a small nucleus it actually processing very strong emotions such as fear anger and pleasure we're going to talk more in the following slides amygdala is very important for emotion regulations if you remember the lab that we learned amygdala is underneath oncus and so it's right at the most medial aspect of the temporal lobe and it's a close to hippocampus and the lateral ventricle inferior horn. The amygdala receives a lot of inputs. You can see here from the sensory cortex, from the other limbic structures, from the olfactory bulb, and other structures like hypothalamus, brainstem. You can see it also gives out the output, you know, to everywhere, pretty much all over the brain. What I would like you to remember is this hypothalamus and septal areas. So those are two main aspects of the amygdala's output. So basically because amygdala mediating the very strong feeling like anger and fear, you know that when we are feeling scared, you know watching a horror movie your heart start pounding right so you feel that palpitation or when you're angry then your blood pressure just goes up you know without your control so those are all autonomic functions being changed by the emotion and so that's through this gateway of hypothalamus so hypothalamus is a main regulator for the autonomic functions in the body maintaining the homeostasis the link with the septal area is related to the like the reward pathway so the septal area we're going to cover more in the future slides so basically you know when you have something pleasant for example you smell like a fragrant perfume then you feel happy and And, you know, that pleasure, that euphoria type of feeling is mediated by the amygdala kind of receiving the factory information and then integrating that and then give you that good sense of the pleasurement. So this is a septal area mediated. As we mentioned, it drives the fear sensation and it has a reciprocal connections with the thalamus, hypothalamus. and it attaches the emotional significance to memories. So basically, whatever memory that can associate with emotional responses is controlled by the amygdala. So, for example, you smell the really nice perfume that's being used by a pretty lady and you love it, then that memory will link with a very pleasant feeling. So that emotional significance linked with the memories, the emotional association is made by amygdala. I mentioned about the perfume specifically because it's actually very important for olfactory memory. So, you know, basically, you can tell the odor, you know, the stink odor versus the fragrant odor will produce different emotional, like, effective feeling, right? So those are mediated by amygdala. Lesions to amygdala bilaterally will cause this classic Kluver-Bussi syndrome. So the Kluver -Bussi syndrome is basically blunted emotional response to all kinds of stimuli. For example, the person become more placid, you know, with decreased aggressiveness, and then also psychiatric blindness so that meaning you know when you're supposed to have a strong emotion now it become more docile you know a example would be monkeys approach snake not really scared but really you know hey what are you doing you know that kind of thing and hyper metamorphosis meaning you know the visual stimuli being considered as new even though they're not so sometimes something like novel object recognition being impaired there's also hyperorality that means you have you know like a very strong tendency of putting in something inappropriate to your mouth so like eating pencils eating dirt and there's also hypersexuality so loss that preference to ****** partners and also enterograde amnesia. So enterograde meaning going forward. So it's in contrast with retrograde. So enterograde meaning the new memories cannot be formed. So for example, what you have eaten in the morning, you forgot, you know, just can't remember those things that happens very recently. But the retrograde amnesia would be something like, you know, what's your own birthday, What's your parents name? You know, things like that. Those would be retrograde amnesia. So usually if you remember our patient EP, usually this is caused by the loss of hippocampus and amygdala together. So then the patient would suffer very severe deficit in forming new memories. so the Kluver-Bussi syndrome is the lesion or the reduction or removal of amygdala function now if the amygdala is a hyperactive it's also causing trouble we all know that soldiers a lot of times suffering from PTSD right post-traumatic stress disorder coming back from the battlefield So the current hypothesis is that the PTSD is usually characterized by the aberrant amygdala activation and also abnormal functional connections between the cortical and limbic structures. So this is mostly associated with hyperarousal and hypervigilance to threat. okay now we've finished talking about the big threes you know the cingulate gyrus hippocampal formation and amygdala now let's talk about the rest of the limbic structures the first one is orbital frontal cortex so it's located here shown in this neon green color so at the very tip of the frontal lobe it has a lot of the reciprocal connections with the rest of the limbic system such as the thalamus the dorsal medial nucleus of the thalamus and also septal areas and uh you know so this is at the frontal lobe and uh hypothalamic nuclei so um the primary role of the orbitofrontal cortex is also processing emotional sensations and social context. If you remember the, you know, the famous patient, the Phoenix Gage, you know, the prefrontal cortex are really controlling patient's personality, then this is part of the prefrontal cortex. and another important function is this secondary olfactory cortex for smell. So in order to differentiate different odors and then link the odors with the different memories, this orbitofrontal cortex is also important. Septal area, what is a septal area? So the septal area is considered including nucleus accumbens and the back nucleus of the stria terminalis. If you remember, the stria terminalis is the output structure from amygdala to the hypothalamus. And so there are some nuclei that are buried within the stria terminalis. It's called the back nucleus. And these structures are closely, anatomically, closely next to each other. is to have a very strong emotional response, mediating the reward and learning. So this is a very important dopamine pathway called the mytholimbic pathway. The destination is at nucleus accumbens. So the nucleus accumbens has like abundant dopaminergic terminals there. When we eat something like ice cream or chocolate, the dopamine is released. This is an important area. The nucleus accumbens is a very important area to mediate those reward response. And hypothalamus is a very important limbic structure. It has reciprocal connections with the amygdala. and also linked with a whole lot of other limbic structures too. The major function for hypothalamus is to control autonomic output and endocrine responses, as well as a homeostasis. We're not going to talk in great details here since you have a special lecture by Dr. Grubisic. And you can really learn all kinds of nuclei that hypothalamus are controlling in that lecture. An important structure that I'd like to mention here in the hypothalamus is called mammillary bodies. So the mammillary bodies, if you recall from our anatomy lab, is very round at the very end of the hypothalamus. And this round structure is actually very important for mediating the memory. It's connecting with this nucleus, with the anterior nucleus of the thalamus through this long track called the mammothalamic track. So it goes around the thalamus and eventually reach the anterior nucleus of the thalamus. This is a very picture that's related to, clinically related to the Wernicke -Korsakoff syndrome. So look at here, this is our stem. You can read what's the presentations of these, and this is a lesion. You can see the mammary body has all those holes, right? So you have degeneration of the mammary body, and thus the patients would experience all these symptoms. Let's take a closer look at the Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome. So, Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome is mainly caused by vitamin B1 deficiency. And this happens a lot in the alcoholics or poor nutrition people. So, the vitamin B1 deficiency can cause the Wernicke encephalophysy or Korsakoff psychosis. So those are two different diseases, or they can be linked together called Wernicke -Korsakoff. So basically, not only with encephalopathy, but also with psychosis. And Wernicke has, you know, kind of a slightly less severe symptoms like confusion, ataxia, nystagmus, and ophthalmoplegia. and those are you can call it a can of beer problem you know the alcoholics have those problems right so but when it develops further when the mammillary body is degenerated then you start to see the amnesia and hallucinations in the person so by then it's a lot more severe than just the Wernicke encephalopathy. So Wernicke -Korsakoff, you can see the damage here and the mediothalamus. So pretty strong, pretty severe damage to the entire diencephalon. And how are we going to treat it? Because the Wernicke -Horsakoff syndromes are due to the vitamin B1 deficiency, we could supplement the vitamin B1 to the diet. And if we intervene that early enough, it's usually reversible. So prognosis is pretty good. However, if it's really going into the strong, like a severe degeneration of the mammillary body, then you would not be able to see the reversal. You know, just like the patient that we see in the previous slide that it does not get complete recovery from that degeneration of mandular body. The earliest description of the limbic connection is called the Papus circuit. This discovery is made by Dr. Pappas in 1937, so really almost 100 years ago. So this circuit starts from the hippocampus arbitrarily. And you can see it goes to the hypothalamus mammary bodies, anterior thalamic nuclei, cingulate gyrus, and then comes back to form a full circle. By now, you should be able to tell me what is the major pathway from hippocampus to the mammular bodies. If you remembered, we talked about that little gymnast, you know, with the arms and legs, right? The legs actually connecting with the hippocampus started with the fimbria, that's the major output from the hippocampal formation, and then merged into the fornix, right? That's the structure that looks like gymnasts. And from there, you know, the arms will reach the mammary bodies at the very bottom of the hypothalamus. From the hypothalamus, there is a mammothalamic tract to go up to the anterior thalamic nuclei. And then from that thalamic nuclei goes all the way up to the cingulate gyrus through the anterior limb of the internal capsule. From there, the cingulate gyrus connecting back to the hippocampus via this structure called cingulum. Here again, starting from hippocampus, fimbria, and fornix, connecting the hippocampus with the hypothalamus mammillary body and from here through the mammothalamic tract linked with the anterior nucleus of the thalamus and then from this thalamic nuclei going through the anterior limb of the internal capsule now reach the cingulate gyrus and then from the singular gyrus through cingulum comes back to the hippocampal formation. So this is the entire pivot circuit. It is important for episodic memory consolidation. And of course, you know, the entire limbic system is important for emotion processing and memory. Okay, let's look at some clinical cases. So here there is a patient called HM. So HM has this image. Are you able to see what's the lesion or what's the deficit? You can see the enlarged BCD images in these three BCD. So what's lacking here is shown clearly. The medial temporal lobe is damaged, right? So the medial temporal lobe is removed, this patient, for treatment of intractable epilepsy or seizure. And remember, we talked about temporal lobe epilepsy. So there are some patients that have repeated the temporal lobe activation. And, you know, eventually they have to be, you know, these structures that's always causing trouble has to be removed. And what's the consequence of this? So HM suffer from very severe anterior grade amnesia. Anterior grade amnesia means you cannot form new memories. So the very long -term memory from, you know, the old, before the surgery removal is intact. Now, besides the anterior grade amnesia, what else do you think HM experiences? Think about what else, you know, besides the hippocampus, what other structures is removed here? turn out that HM is having problems with olfactory as well. So it cannot discriminate odors anymore. This is because the primary olfactory cortex is located here. It's called the piriform cortex, which includes the interrhinal cortex and amygdala. So this is a primary olfactory cortex, processing the different odors, you know, differentiation of different odors, and also attach those odors with emotional responses. Do you remember the secondary olfactory cortex we just talked about? It's orbital frontal cortex, right? So that's secondary. And this primary olfactory cortex is the main structure that differentiating and putting the emotional significance to these odors. So without the medial temporal lobe, you would not be able to have this primary olfactory cortex. So that's another major loss besides amnesia. You know, besides the memory function, also this patient, HM, does not have the olfactory function. And besides is that also because of the amygdala loss, the person would not be able to keep track of his internal state. Meaning, you know, if you're hungry, if you're, you know, like a fatigue, exhausted, you know, thirsty, all these different states of your body, the internal states of the body is not tracked by the amygdala anymore. So those are the more subtle deficits, but also having problems there. One thing that's not impacted, you know, with this HM, so the procedural memory is actually maintained. So procedural memory is like, you know, how to do things, like how to, you know, for example, this Tower of Hanoi. So this is, you know, you have to move these pieces to another bar, you know, either this bar or that bar. And then try to maintain still from the bottom up, the different sizes has to be in the order. So from a large piece to the small piece. So this procedural memory is still intact in HM. So loss of the medial temporal lobe does not impact the procedural memory. So where does the procedure? So clearly different types of memory is controlled by different parts of the brain. Let's go through some basic brain structures that's related to different types of memories. Memories can be divided into explicit memory or implicit memory. Explicit memory is like more clear like what we are talking about, events or facts. And those are the things that you have very specific information related to this type of memory, like which date is my anniversary, right? Something like that. Those are controlled by the medial temporal lobe and medial diencephalon. So if you recall, we talked about the hippocampus and the amygdala, very important for the formation of explicit memory, as well as the medial diencephalon-like mammillary body, anterior nucleus of the thalamus, right? So those are the important structures forming explicit memory. Implicit memory is also called the procedural memory. So those memories are not the traditional meaning, you know, classical meaning of the memory that we all think about. For example, you know, skills and habits, you know, like you can ride a bike and then you remember that even 10 years after you don't ride a bike, you can still do it. Some others like emotional associations to, you know, a condition, something like maybe not emotional, but just conditioned reflexes. For example, if you are, you know, doing something like a fear conditioning with animals. We use that a lot in the rat study or my study. So you basically give an electrical shock to the animal's foot when you pair that with a bell sound, bell ringing sound. You know, the animal frees with the electrical shock, right? So if you pair that bell ringing sound with this electrical shock, then every time you have those two stimuli coming together, the rattle mouse will freeze. And then later on, after repeated training, after this conditioning, if you give just the bell ring without electrical shock, the rattle mouse would also freeze. So this is the memory that's formed with emotional associations. And some others, like if you pair a conditional stimulus with unconditional stimulus without any emotion attached to it, they're at different brain regions. So for the skills and habits, the cerebellum and motor cortex and striatum are very important for that type of learning. For emotional associations, amygdala, and for other condition reflexes, the associations are responsible by the cerebellum activation. So those are different brain areas that help informing different types of memory. And here we always talk about something like working memory and long-term memory. So the The working memory is controlled by the frontal cortex, so that's not hippocampal formation related. The frontal cortex is helping with that short memory that's related to planning, related to reasoning. So those are more in the frontal cortex. And also for the long -term memory. Long-term memory is something like a very long term that you have already the memory consolidated. That's also hippocampal independent, so basically not related to the hippocampus anymore. It's actually stored at diffused areas of the association cortices in the neocortex. So make sure you remember what types of memory is controlled by what brain structures. Now let's talk about some memory disorders. So there are different types of amnesia and also a more severe form, Alzheimer's disease. Those are all related to the memory disorders. Amnesia, we talked about several different kinds so far, right? There are vascular costs of the amnesia, basically the bilateral medial temporal lobe damage because they're sensitive to hypoxia. There's also trauma. Trauma can be damaging the mammary bodies relatively easier. and then also surgery, right, to remove the temporal lobe epilepsy, the foci for the epilepsy origin. And also infections. We talked about the ****** virus specifically can attack the medial temporal lobe and produce damage there to produce amnesia. And also alcoholics can suffer from vitamin B1 deficiency and hence Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome. That's the damage of the mammary bodies, and mediothalamus. So all of those damages can cause amnesia. And a more severe case of Alzheimer's is the degeneration of the gray matter everywhere, you know, in the entire brain, especially the hippocampal atrophy. And you can see here, the ventricles are, the lateral ventricles are much enlarged. And also the, you know, the sulci becomes really deep. This is because of the degeneration of the gray matter. So you have that gray matter density reduction. Neurochemically, these are correlating to severe decrease of acetylcholin. So acetylcholin is a major neurotransmitter related to the neocortex functions. And significant degeneration of the acetylcholin production from the basal nucleus basal forebrain and the tegmental area too. The treatment for this can be acetylcholine asteris inhibitor. So acetylcholine is broken down by the acetylcholine asteris and if you inhibit this enzyme you can reduce the broken down of the acetylcholine and to raise the synaptic concentration. So this is one way to reduce the symptoms of Alzheimer's, but it does not usually reverse the degenerative processing. So it might be able to slow down the deterioration of the decline of the cognition, but it's not able to reverse this degeneration in the Alzheimer's neurons. okay now this is our time to test ourselves and review what different knowledge that we have talked about in this hour and this is a matching the type of memory so this side is the type of memory to the brain structures that's maybe related to this type of memory keep in mind that one structure may be related to multiple memory types, or one memory types are responsible by different brain structures. So this is not a one-to-one link. Give yourself some time to complete this. Hope you've got this right. now let's take it home test yourselves now we talked about you know a bunch of limbic structures here and are you able to fill in the blank what their major functions are so pause the slide now and then try to fill in the blank now here's the answer so of course all the limbic structures are related to emotional processing. Remember, we talked about the five Fs, right? But each structure has its own little emphasis. So for example, you know, medkala related to fear and affection. So make sure you go through these again, you know, for each structure, what are their special, unique emphasis about the emotional processing and remember all of these. okay that's all for our lecture for limbic structure and if you have any questions make sure you email me here and if you have any feedback make sure you click on this link and then send me some comments or suggestions thank you very much for your attention