Hello, everybody. My name is Dr. Richard Morgan, DPR1 coordinator, as you know, and I will be presenting a series of lectures for the neurologic exam. This will be the first of a three-part neurologic exam lecture series. This one is entitled Neuroexam 1, Mental Status, Cranial Nerves, and the Eye Exam. So what are the objectives for today? We're going to learn how to obtain a health history in a patient with a neurologic complaint. We're going to assess the mental status and review all the cranial nerves, all 12 of them, as well as learn how to perform the cranial nerve exam as we will be practicing them as well in the DPR1 lab. We will then review the eye examination, as well as correlate a neurologic diagnosis from the cranial nerve exam. Finally, we'll be showing you how to document in proper SOAP note form the physical findings for cranial nerve exam. It'll be more of a comprehensive exhaustive look at how we document it, although not always will every single patient be needed to lay it out this way. It's simply for completeness sake and understanding a comprehensive exam. Why do we perform a neurologic exam? Well, it's really important, especially depending on the reason why a patient will come to your office. It can give you a lot of valuable information, as you'll learn from neuroanatomy. This is one of the ways we can really correlate clinical diagnoses and the anatomical structures that you're examining. What it comes down to is one simple or subtle or obvious finding that a deficit can be not just lead to one particular cranial nerve deficit, but can also lead to a multitude of other possibilities in diagnosing someone with the multitude of neurologic pathologies that can exist. So really, the neurologic exam is a vital key component of any examination and should be completed in its entirety, especially when you're looking for a specific neurologic problem or if the patient presents with a neurologic deficit. What are the components of the screening of a neurologic examination? Well, in its entirety, we start with mental status, right? Level of alertness, appropriateness of responses, as well as orientations of person, place, and time. Second, we include the cranial nerves. This will include all 12 cranial nerves. Oftentimes, times the one could be left out, but cranial nerve one has been more included lately with the advent of COVID in the past few years and other diseases that do have issues where the abdominal nerve is a deficit. Cranial nerves include testing visual acuity, pupillary light reflex, ocular movements, auditory acuity, hearing both gross and specific deficits, as well as facial strength testing, and then finally speech. Those are the cranial nerves. Then the third component of a neurologic exam includes motor. Now, motor strength testing, you might think, well, don't we do that in the MSK or musculoskeletal labs? Well, in fact, in this case, it's really vital to do motor testing because each muscle weakness or deficit, if you will, can be specifically linked or correlating to a cranial nerve or other neurologic deficit. For instance, 12 cranial nerve involves lexistimus dorsi and the SCM, the sternocleidomastoid. So that's a cranial nerve specifically linked to a motor strength testing examination. So a deficit there could directly be linked specifically to a cranial nerve deficit. So motor strength testing is really vital in determining as a component. We always break things down, neuro, muscular, but really they're all interrelated in a lot of ways. And especially with motor system, this is where you will see that overlapping, if you will, of neural and muscular systems. Strength testing can include any role of following, shoulder abduction, elbow flexion, extension, and so on and so forth. Next, we have gait. Gait examination is vital in not just neurologic testing, but any kind of testing where the specific pattern of gait can give a lot of information as to what's going on with the patient. Coordination is another thing. fine finger movements, finger to nose and finger to chin, and we'll be going with that in subsequent lectures. And then reflexes involving deep tendon in both plantar responses. We'll review how to perform them as well. Again, everything we're doing here will show you how they're going to be performed in lab itself. And then finally, the sensory system. One modality of the toes can be light touch, pain, temperature, or appropriate reception. And these are all important in their different ways can all lead to different deficits that can be found all along the various neurologic pathways. There'll be some slides that I'll be showing you that do include pathophysiology. It's more for record's sake, and I'll mention them as we get to them. We're going to be focusing more on the clinical exams in this particular lecture, but I think I'll point out when they are important and things that you will need to know moving forward. Now, taking a neurologic health history, And we know about our regular history, right? But if a patient comes with a specific neurologic complaint, your HPI that you know to ask the OPP QRSCA questions are vital. However, if someone comes to you with one of the following neurologic complaints, we want to do a more detailed history as it can be related to possible neurologic complaints, or at least involve in the associated symptoms more a clinical picture of potential neurologic deficits. Such common symptoms that can be presenting are headache, dizziness or vertigo, weakness that can be generalized proximal or distal, overall body weakness, or unilateral facial or arm or leg weakness. One other way patients can present is with syncope or passing out or near syncopal episode. Also, a history of seizures or a recent seizure needs to be ruled out, specific neurologic pathologies. And then finally, tremor or involuntary movements, something else. Now, this is not an exhaustive list, but these are very common reasons why people will present to their healthcare personnel. And in these cases, a comprehensive neurologic exam is appropriate. Now, if someone came to me with, you know, knee pain or ankle pain, a comprehensive neurologic exam won't be necessary in that example, unless the patient reports a history of something more in -depth with neurologic findings, either in their own or in their family history, that you need to look further. But from a neurologic standpoint, if the patient presents with these symptoms, it's really important to do a comprehensive neurologic exam to determine the potential causes. Now, how do we do a neurologic exam? As with everyone, we start with taking the regular patient's history, the HPI. We do our OPP -QRST, but we do a focused exam. We do a focused questions that might have more of a neurologic basis, right? We're trying to determine if the deficit they're presenting with or the symptoms they're presenting with have a specific localization or if it's a more general response. And if so, what is the localization of the lesion or lesions? Are the findings symmetrical? What is the pathology or pathophysiology of the admirable findings? And ultimately, what is the preliminary differential diagnosis? And I said this in DPR, and I'll say it again because it's important to mention that a good, detailed HPI is going to give you likely 90% to 95% of your diagnosis or likely diagnosis every single time. Asking the right questions is everything. Now, confirming that with your physical exam is just as vital, but knowing the way you want to approach your physical exam all stems from your HPI. you start with the mental status exam right patient walks in you get their appearance and behavior listen to their speech and language you notice any eight pages or broken speeches or impaired speeches are they slurring their speech um what's their mood what's their affect how are they presenting to you what are their general thoughts and perceptions excuse me and then ultimately what's their cognitive function all these things are just part of their general appearance and the mental status exam. Now, here's an example of a Glasgow coma scale. You'll be given this, and you'll be seeing a lot of this when you're on the ER rotations or working in the ICU settings on your third -year prefrontals. But what's important to note is that Glasgow coma is the determination of level of consciousness in a patient. Level of consciousness is based on three components, ocular, motor response, and verbal response. Each one has a top score of five, meaning that a 15 is a perfect score, meaning the patient's conscious and in no distress. A three is the lowest score, which means the patient's unconscious, and the degree of between three and 15 makes it usually a determining factor as to whether this patient's in a coma versus being completely conscious. And you'll learn how to take these scores when you do them in the ER and your ICU settings and whatnot. Now, I'm not going to go over every single one, but I'm going to give you a summary of the cranial nerves that we'll be going over, cranial nerves 1 through 12. Obviously, in order, we start with olfactory. As I mentioned before, it's oftentimes not always done, but it can be done in cases where, like I said, COVID was a possible differential or Kalman syndrome, which is another disorder where smell is lacking and so on and so forth. And you can see everything listed here lists the cranial nerve with their function, and then what the abnormal clinical finding might be. Here's the rest of the cranial nerves, 8 through 12, same thing. We list them, and you'll notice some cranial nerves have a sensory component, some have a motor, and some have both. In each case, we'll go over the specific way that we clinically do our physical examinations from a sensory and motor component, if need be. Let's start with the olfactory nerve, which, as I said, this is testing for sense of smell. Simply a way to do it is you ask the patient to close their eyes and you include one nostril. You take your test substance, which is brought close to the unobstructed nostril, have the patient sniff and try to identify the substance. In lab, we usually use a coffee bean or coffee grounds. Oftentimes, some doctors will use a coffee smelling substance like ethanol, you know, ethyl alcohol. cloves, or even vanilla beans, depending on the level of smell deficit that may or may not exist. The examination of the eye. This is our visual acuity, cranial nerve two. This is broken down into a couple of components. We start with our visual acuity. We move on to visual field by confrontation. These are both optic nerves. Then the cranial nerve three, the oculomotor, involves pupillary reaction and response. Next, we go into the muscle movements, which is three, four, and six, oculomotor, trochlear, and abducens. And then we move on to anterior and posterior segments of the fundoscopic exam. Let's start with visual acuity. Here's some terminology that you'll be familiar with. Oftentimes, when a neurologist or ophthalmologist comes to examine one of your patients on a consult, these are the terms you'll often see. VA refers to visual acuity. OD is right eye, OS is left eye, and OU is both eyes. Latin phrases are there. That's just where you know the meanings as far as where these terms came from. Here's examples of some of the eye charts you'll often be seeing used in offices, both family practice, both ophthalmology, or just in general. In lab, you will likely be using the Rosenbaum or the Snellen chart. We don't use the Tumbling E or the kindergarten chart, obviously, but some of your kits, when you purchase your ophthalmoscope and otoscopes, they do come with the Snellen chart or Rosenbaum chart, but if you don't, some of them will be provided. Each group will have some charts provided so you can practice the proper way to demonstrate having a patient read the eye chart in lab. Distance visual acuity testing. Here's just some of the nomenclature. Distance between the patient and the eye chart. The distance in which the letter can be read by a person with normal visual acuity. These are things you should know. And know that normal is 20-20 vision and anything below normal is 20-40 or higher. Some common refractive errors that we often ear or see. Hyperopia, which is farsightedness. Really, these terms, refractive, refer to the shape of the ocular globe. So if the globe is too narrow or short, that would cause a person to become farsighted, where they can see far clearly, but things up close are much more blurry for them. Myopia is nearsightedness, where the globe is too long. The light refocus is in front of the retina, and distant objects require a diverging lens. Okay, this is probably of the more common nearsightedness where people can often see things close but struggle with things in the distance. Stigmatism, its corneal surface, is not perfectly spherical. Refractive power is different at different axes, and these require cylindrical correct lenses. And then finally, transbiopia, which is kind of age-related farsightedness, where the lens becomes unable to increase the refractive power to accommodate on near objects. So you'll be hearing and seeing these terms over and over, and they come up a lot in other position -referral notes. Just for your reference, here's an example of just a diagram of the visual field of what you're looking at. The entire area is seen by an eye when it looks at a central point. The field does extend farthest on the temporal side, and we'll be showing you more pictures of what the fundoscopy exam looks at with some real -life pictures as well. Here's just an example of how the fields converge from inocular to binocular vision. Again, this is more for your reference and we'll be able to apply this clinically as we do our physical exam. Again, this is an example of what the pathologies look like if there's a deficit in one area and then what the correlating clinical finding would be. Again, we'll be focusing more on normals in lab. This is a great, great slide though for references when it comes to comp and board studying it's a very common question often seen on comp exams comlex and the usmoes they love this type of exam where you find the deficit or it's presented in a clinical finding and you have to determine what the deficit is where they'll give you the clinical presentation so it really is important to know this slide moving forward we're going to focus more on normals in this particular lecture next we have visual fields by confrontation for the second cranial nerve, all right? What's this part called? This is the static finger wiggle test. And you might have had this done before. The way we do it, as you can see in the picture, you stand up just in front of the patient, have them look directly into your eyes. Then the physician takes their hands two feet apart, lateral to the patient's ear, so they're out of sight. They have to be looking at you so they can't see them. You start to wiggle both fingers and simultaneously bring them slowly forward as if in a bowl. perving inwards towards central vision. You let the patient know as they're looking directly into your eyes as soon as they see movement. And commonly without deficits, patients can see them very quickly. But it's important not just to do this in one frame of reference, but in all four quadrants so that the patients, you don't want to miss any kind of visual field deficits, especially if a lot of times you might be missing in one or more areas. And if you only check one, it's not as comprehensive as it should be. Further testing for visual fields by confrontation also include finding if a defect is found with the static figure wiggle test, then you test each eye at a time by having the patient covering their eye with their hand and the examiner covers their opposite eye and you repeat the wiggle test by having them while they're having the patient keep the gaze with you and at a point that they're staring at equal distance between the examiner a patient, you move the wiggling fingers into the defect area until the patient reports seeing it. And of course, you want to do, as we always do, do everything bilaterally and repeat the steps in different levels so you can map out the defect. It might only have trouble with the lower field on one side or the upper field on the opposite side. So it's important to really document where that defect is noted on your exam. Now, inspection. With everything we do in our physical exam, always remember to include inspection, and that includes the eyes. Standing in front of the patient at eye level, assessing asymmetry and position of the eye, as well as proper alignment. Check the eyebrows out. Look for symmetry or sparing a pair. Is there drooping on one side? Inspect the eyelids for ptosis or swelling or lesions, or even eversion inversion of the eyelids. Really pay close attention. Remember, inspection is vital. People often overlook it, but it truly gives you a baseline for what you need to go further into depth. Here's a couple of minor basic examples of what you might see on inspection. The first one on the left there is an example of conjunctivitis, where there's a little bit of discharge coming, purely discharge coming from the conjunctiva. The second example is exophthalmos, which is enlarged eyes or protruding eyes, which is often seen in the thyroid condition called Graves' disease. This is an example, a classic example of what that would look like. Then finally, ptosis. This is a unilateral ptosis. In this case, this gentleman has ptosis or drooping eyelid on the right. It's often seen in myasthenia gravis and some other neurologic diseases as well. Now we want to make sure we don't forget to assess the pupil. Why is this important? Pupillary size tells us a lot, right? Tells a lot about what could be going on with the patient, if the pupil's too big, the pupil's too small. And it can often, we can use that information that we get to combine with what we gathered in our social history, in the history of the patient, or what they told us about what's going on with them to help determine if they're being truthful or not. And I'll explain. So pupil size can be measure using a card, and you'll see that it's often found at the bottom of the Snell and the Rosenbaum charts. You can often easily measure by putting it up to the patient's eye. Generally, if they're greater than five millimeters, it's considered large. Anything can vary from one to five, even a little bit bigger. The most important thing is to see symmetry. But if there's obviously increase in size, like greater than five millimeters, it's considered large. Anything less than three is considered small. And here's an example of why this is important, right? So here's a normal one in the left upper picture. That's a normal pupillary response. Now you can see one that's meiotic, where it's a pinpoint pupil in the bottom left. Why is that important? Because the patient could be on a substance, such as an opioid or painkillers or anything like that. And if they were not truthful, let's say, in their social history, where you took a detailed history, and you might be able to combine other neurologic findings in your exam that tell you otherwise from what the patient might not be telling you in honesty. So it's important to get this information. The examples on the right show a dilated pupil. And the same thing goes for this. The pupil in this case is enlarged. And in the bottom right, it's extremely enlarged. And that's usually due to more of a stimulant-based medications that the patient's on or drugs, such as methamphetamines, *******, Ritalin, and other diet drugs. So it's important to note pupillary response and correlate that with possibly the social history with what's going on the patient. Pupillary response includes the oculomotor nerve. In this case, simply what we do is we direct the pen light into the eye while the patient's looking at a distance far up over your shoulder. You confirm that the pupil constricts to light and you compare pupillary diameters bilaterally. Not necessarily, we always just measuring them, but we're looking for a symmetrical response response to constriction that's somewhat equal. Then we do a direct response and a consensual response. Every time you do a pupillary response, it's both direct and consensual. What's the difference? Direct response involves looking in the eye that you're actually shining the light in. In other words, the ipsilateral eye. You put the pen light into the eye, you notice the constriction. The consensual response should also be done. And what that does is when you're shining a light in the ipsilateral side, you're looking for contralateral restriction. So in this case, the gentleman has the eye, the light shining in his left eye, and at this point, you're looking for a consensual response, which is constriction of his right eye, all right? And you can do both separately. You do both direct responses first, and then do both consensual responses first. And again, it's very important. This tells you a lot of valuable information that you could need later on in your diagnosis and possible treatment. Here's a pathophysiology of the pupillary response, what it looks like. Again, this is going to be something you can combine with a lot of your neuroanatomy lectures. I won't get into any great detail, but it gives you an idea of how the eye responds and why what occurs and why the eye is constricting on one side with both a direct and consensual response. next we have the near reaction or convergence this is two other ways that we could actually measure constriction of the pupils and what do we do the near reaction okay is a pupillary constriction with near effort okay this is what we can use in lieu of light if the patient is like let's say hypersensitive to light we can use this as well what we do is in normal room light we stand in front of the patient holding a pencil or your finger 10 centimeters from the patient's eye. You have the patient look to an alternate place way behind you to be on a far wall or out the window in the OMM lab, anything like that. Once they're looking out, at that point, you're staring at their eyes. And then while you're looking at them, you have them look and start to converge or you have them look near at the object in your hand, which should be a pencil, like I said, or your finger. As they move from far to near, hence the near response, you'll notice that the pupils will constrict and that's a normal response is a bilateral constriction as their their gaze goes from far to near and that's what you're looking for in the near reaction convergence is a simple way that we can measure to see that the eyes are working together synchronously we have the patient follow your finger object that's approximately 12 inches from their nose about five to eight centimeters off of that and normal would be as as you move the pen or pencil closer then you'll see the eyes kind of moving merging or converging synchronously. And again, you're looking for symmetry. If there's one eye that's not, maybe you notice nystagmus, which is a tremor of one eye. All those things can be noted and should be documented. Here's just an example of the extraocular movements. The next component is, it seems overwhelming, and I want to stress this with the cranial nerve exam. There's 12 cranial nerves. There's a lot going on here. And we're breaking them down slide by slide so you can see how these work. But the bottom line is, when you get efficient with doing this, and practice makes perfect, right, really urge you to practice these at home and with your colleagues and with your family members, when you continue to practice this, you'll be able to do this whole neuro exam in literally two to three minutes, maybe sooner. It really goes quick. And here's an example of why. Cranor nerves three, four, and six, okay, checking for oculomotor, extraoculum movements, checks for a number of muscles within the eye. but it's simply doing a one test that takes no more than 10 to 20 seconds. And I'll show you what I mean. How do we test extraocular movements? You stand in front of the patient, you ask them to follow your finger with their eyes only staring right at you and only moving their eyes, not their head. They can't move their head and you proceed to make a wide H pattern in the air covering all six cardinal directions of gaze. If you do that, and it could be done, like I said, within 10 to 15, 20 seconds, you can actually that will cover all three cranial nerves and then you do it bilaterally oh it's done bilaterally so that will tell you um exactly what if there's a deficit or if it's everything's normal so making that wide h it's best to follow a pattern when you stop in each quadrant okay so making that h you start on the upper left let's say you move your finger straight down having the patient remain keeping their head fixed and only moving their eyes to look at your finger. So left upper to left middle to left lower, and then back up to left middle, and then over to right middle, and then right upper, right middle, and right lower. So you're literally making an H but stopping at each quadrant, pausing just a moment so that the patient can follow that gaze of all the patterns. And that's really as easy as it gets. Here's just another example of octal the motility, and which muscles are involved in each ocular movement. So again, this is good for references. Combine this with your neuroanatomy lectures and things you learn in an anatomy lab, and these will definitely help you understand ocular movements. Here's just an example of a diagnosis of different ocular movements. As you can see, The upper one is normal, and then you see that there's various movements that will diagnose a certain pathology based on the way the eyes are moving as they're turning. You can see the various differences, and I'll let you think about this and come up with the diagnosis on your own. Now we'll get into a little bit of the fundoscopic exam with the ophthalmoscope, this wonderful device that you all purchased or got from your siblings who went to med school or parents. and you brought it to lab, and now we're finally going to use it. So we're going to have a whole demonstration of how to use them in lab. The scholars will go over it, your individual pods will review how to use this equipment, and I'll touch on a little bit of it here. How do we do the fundoscopy exam? Well, in the OMM lab, I will shut the lights off, and the whole room will be darkened. It gives you a much better way to examine the red reflex and the fundus. Lens should be turned on to the large, round, white beam of light, and it should be set to zero diopter. The optomoscope should be held in your right hand to examine the patient's right eye and left hand to examine the left eye. So it's always right hand, right eye, left hand, left eye, okay? You start by placing yourselves 15 inches from the patient and add a 15 degree angle from their line of vision. And you ask them to focus on a distant object and keep that gaze fixed. The point is from that point of 15 inches away, your purpose using the light to shine into their eyes to determine and look for the red reflex. Now, with the fundoscopic exam, as you move and you catch the gaze of the red reflex, an example could be seen in the picture on the bottom, what happens is you're placing, as you move toward the patient and you get that red reflex in sight, inside the fundoscopic, inside the ophthalmoscope, once you come up close to the patient, your comfort is just as important. So what you want to do is place your thumb of your free hand on the patient's eyebrow with the ophthalmoscope and against your bony orbit. And what that does is it gives you better maneuverability and give better stability and able to monitor and maneuver the ophthalmoscope in your hand without causing any kind of accident or injury in the patient or whatnot. And when you shine the light in the eye, you will see the orange glow of the pupil, which is known as the red reflex, as you can see it here. with the fundoscopic exam you want to continue to keep the light beam on the eye and continue the 15 degree angle until you're almost touching the patient's eyelashes and then you locate the optic disc by following the blood vessels and seeing where they converge and noting their *********** as you approach the disc focusing using the lens disc to bring the retina into focus if the patient is myopic or nearsighted you want to adjust the lens disc counterclockwise which is the red numbers and then if the patient is farsighted or hyperopic you can adjust the lens disc counterclockwise with the green numbers which is the diopter power display as detailed here and again we'll go over this in lab we'll have the scholars demonstrate it we'll also work on it in the individual pods finally here's an example the fundoscopic exam of what normal looks like on the left here this is what you will be seeing inspecting the optic disc for clarity color of disc size, of central physiologic cup, really want you to spend more time understanding what normals are. You know, I gave you an example of an abnormal such as papilledema, which is ocular swelling from an increasing cranial pressure or edema, causing interaction, intraaxonal edema along the optic nerve. And that's what the difference is between these two. It kind of looks like it gets a little fuzzy and harder to find the optic disc and then the blood vessels also get blurry as well. But focus on the normal one. You want to see enough normals and then when you see enough normals you'll start to know what abnormal is. But most importantly is just to recognize the normal so that when you see an abnormal you know something's wrong. Not everyone's going into ophthalmology so it's okay if you're not sure what you see. But you want to know some of the basic conditions to look those up and especially the more common ones that you'll be seeing. In the CPG for this lab. I'm going to put a link to a short YouTube video that will give you a nice example of how to do a fundoscopy exam. Shutting the lights out, the whole thing in one nice fluid motion. It's about 6-7 minutes, but it gives some really good insight. I'm going to put that on the CPG for this lab. Next, we have the trigeminal nerve or cranial nerve 5. Again, this is a sensory and motor cranial nerve, so we're going to start with the sensory first. Using a pin or a cotton swab, we assess the three distributions of the trigeminal nerve, which include ophthalmic, maxillary, and mandibular. For all you OMM fans out there, which are all DOs or hopefully on our way to becoming DOs, I always like to remember the mnemonic is OMM. So you'll never forget the branches of the trigeminal nerve because the mnemonic is OMM. Nice and easy. We always test bilaterally, of course, as with anything. Next is the corneal reflex. I mentioned this for completeness purposes. We will not be doing this in lab. We don't want students sticking their fingers in their colleagues' eyes, causing a whole bunch of corneal abrasions. So you will be practicing this and need to know it for your clinical rotations down the line. But for purposes of this lab, we will not be performing it. But essentially what you're doing is at a patient's line of vision, you're touching the cornea light, either the fine whisk of cotton or a cotton ball or something, and then you're expecting for closure of both eyelids, which is blinking, which is a normal response. So just keep that in mind. We will not be doing this in lab, but for completeness, you should be familiar with them. Next is the trigeminal motor. This is where we palpate both the temporal mass or muscles. Nice and easy. We do it bilaterally and ask the patient to simply clench their teeth and note the strength of the contraction. And then we have them move the jaw back and forth side to side, and that gives inside us the trigeminal motor component real quick. Like I said, these things go really quick. These are not time-consuming. It seems overwhelming. But again, once you get familiar with practicing these in a condensed, practiced, conduced version, you'll be finishing these really, really quick. You know, by the time you start rotations, you'll be down to like hopefully two to three minutes or even less. Next, we have the facial nerve. Again, sensory and motor components. In this case, we're going to be demonstrating the motor component, okay? So the motor, nice and easy, it sounds complicated to check the facial nerves, actually just performing a series, having the patient go through a series of six different motions. Asking the patient to raise their eyebrows, smile, show their teeth, close both eyes tightly without letting them open because remember cranial nerve seven, you need cranial nerve seven opens the eyes, so three closes them, but seven opens them, so we want to have the patient try to open their eyes, and that helps determine resistance to eye opening. And then we have frown and puff cheeks. You can have them do this again. It takes 15, 20 seconds, and the facial motor component is done. Nice and easy. Again, we will be practicing all of these things in our neural lab. Again, here is another example of pathophysiology, of when there is a cranial R7 or either peripheral or central lesion. For completeness sake and for your references. Once again, great board topic. They love asking questions like this of where the clinical finding is versus where's the lesion. They want you to be able to kind of apply pathophysiology to clinical settings so you can really get a good grasp of what you're seeing and how you can relate it to a specific diagnosis. Next, we have acoustic or vestibulococular. This is the auditory component of the exam or the eighth cranial nerve, and it's broken up into a couple of parts. We'll start with the sensory. Really gross auditory acuity just involves having the patient cover one ear and you can whisper a word or number to them from two feet away, have them repeat the word or number, and you can pair bilaterally. Alternatively, I like this one a little bit more because it's more sensitive and patients oftentimes will always hear you talking, but they may not always hear you rubbing your fingers. So in this case, you cover the ear, they cover their ear, and you rub your finger and thumb and forefinger together next to the uncovered ear and ask the patient as if the sound was heard. And you compare them by latterly. You don't need to do both, but at least one of them will suffice. Now, we go on to the next component of hearing testing, and that involves two basic tests, the Weber test or Weber test and the René test or René test. The Weber and René are like peas and carrots. Both of them need to be done if you're assessing someone for hearings. So when are these tests done? They're done if someone comes to your office where they have either acute or chronic hearing loss, and you want to determine what type of hearing loss it is and where it's coming from. So how do we determine that? We start by doing the Weber test. The Weber test is testing for lateralization of sound. So what does that mean? We take the tuning fork in your bag as the one that's shown above, the 512 hertz. We vibrate it on our hand or on the table, and then we place it on top of their head, and then we ask the patient to identify where they feel the vibration. Oftentimes, for a normal patient, they'll feel it just in the middle of the head, which is normal, and it's not called lateralization. Now, the patient, let's say, you put the vibrating tuning fork at the top of their head, and now it's vibrating, and they feel it down the left side to the left ear. That means that they have left-sided lateralization. What does that tell us? Well, for the Weber test, if it lateralizes to the left side, That means that they either have conductive hearing loss on the left or sensory neural hearing loss on the right. So how do we determine which is which? Then we take the next part, which is where we do the Rene test. The Rene test will tell us if it's conductive on the same side or neurosensory on the contralateral side. So how do we do this test? We take the same 512 hertz tuning fork. we strike it again to create the vibration and place it at the mastoid process behind the ear being evaluated. So if they were lateralizing to the right ear, let's say, then you put this and start on the right ear. You put the vibrating tuning fork on the mastoid process and ask the patient to let you know when they no longer hear the sound. Once they no longer hear the sound, you move the tuning fork just next to the ear and ask them if they can still hear the tuning fork. This helps us determine the difference in length of time between bone and air conduction, right? So first we're testing bone conduction, but if they still hear it, that means air conduction is lasting longer, okay? What does that tell us? Well, here is what it tells us. So for normal, the air conduction is always greater than bone conduction, right? It makes an inducing sense that air conduction will last longer. For unilateral sensorineural hearing loss, air conduction will be greater than bone conduction. But for conductive hearing loss, most commonly, the bone conduction will be greater than the air conduction. We're going to go over this in lab. I think it's easier when you see it done. But I think it's important from a standpoint where sometimes it's hard to combine the two. So just to reiterate, the Weber test tells us which side it lateralizes. If it lateralizes to the left side, that tells us it's either a left conductive hearing loss or a right sensorineural hearing loss. The Rene test will tell us specifically if it's conductive or sensorineural based on which is longer arrow bone conduction. Here's an example of doing a couple tests. So here's where the first one, it demonstrates the Weber test sound lateralizes to the left ear, right? So like I said, that tells us if it's left conductive or right sensory neural. Then we do the Rene test. And in this case, you see the bone conduction is greater than air conduction in the left ear. Air conduction is greater than bone conduction in the right ear. Therefore, we have a conductive hearing loss, which can involve cerumen, earwax, foreign body, or maybe otitis media, which is an air infection in the left ear. And again, this is probably the most common type of hearing loss there is. Most people you see might have cerumen impaction. They don't clean their ears properly. They develop a lot of wax buildup. And inadvertently, where they feel like they've slowly, subtly lost hearing over time, it actually could be due to wax buildup rather than any kind of infection or other foreign body needs. And it's thought that there's a decrease in the masking effects of the background noise with conductive hearing loss. Second example is with Renee. If the air conduction is greater than bone in the left ear, and it's also greater in the right ear, this is a conclusion where sensory neural deficit is more likely, or like otosclerosis or something along those lines, and that would be in the right ear. Next, we have cranial nerves 9 and 10, the glostoparyngeal nerve. Again, this is sensory and motor. This involves a gag reflex or taste for the posterior third of tongue. As similar to the corneal reflex, this is something we will not be practicing in lab. We don't do gag reflexes. We don't need patients, students, gagging all over the lab. But again, it's for completeness sake, and you will have to know it if you're doing IM or neurology rounds or even PM&R where you work on ****** patients, where it is important to really determine a gag reflex. Creator of 10 is the vagus nerve, again, both sensory and motor components. Again, this is how you can actually just listen to the quality of the patient's voice. Is it guttural or frog-like? Does it have a normal quality to it? Then you can have the patient swallow and observe them to see if there's normal swallowing components. Then instruct the patient to open their mouth and say, ah, looking for symmetrical movement of both the soft palate and location and movement of the uvula. Again, gag reflex is important to know, but we will be not demonstrating them or practicing them in the lab. Next, we have the spinal accessory nerve, cranial nerve 11. This is only a pure motor nerve. The spinal accessory nerve innervates both the sternocleidomastoid and the trapezius muscles. So we want to basically do motor strength testing of those two muscles. So first thing we do is we can palpate what we expect for atrophy of either muscle group or fasciculations bilaterally. And then we ask the patient to simply shrug their shoulders against resistance. That'll be for the trapezius. Secondly, with the sternocleidomastoid, we're checking for side network for rotation of the cervical spine. for the rotation of that neck, which then will determine a weakness of the sternocleidomaxone on either side. And this is done, as you can see in the picture, by placing your hand on one side of the patient's face and asking them to turn their head towards that side. You apply resistance and notice any deficit or weakness on one side, which will then tell you if there's a deficit of that nerve. Finally, we have cranial nerve 12, which is the hypoglossal, which is a pure motor nerve. This is basically the tongue. So in old days, when I was in that school, they would have us put on gloves and grab the tongue and move it left, right. These days, it's pretty straightforward. You instruct the patient over their mouth. You inspect the tongue as it lies on the floor of the mouth. You have them protrude their tongue, move it left to right. Notice for any asymmetry, atrophy, deviations from midline. Then finally, you instruct the patient to move the tongue from side to side, and then even have them push it against the inside of each cheek, so that will tell you your strength of the tongue, all right? So it is important to check all that, and like I said, it doesn't take long at all. It really is important when you're examining the gradient layers. Here's an example of what a deviated tongue looks like. This patient with acid the signal comes straight out, and you can see it deviates to the left, so patient's left. So the diagnosis here would be a left -sided deficit of a hypoglossal nerve. It's usually, it's always ipsilateral in most cases, that it deviates to the side that's affected. Finally, here, we're going to just go over documentation of a normal neurologic exam, um how we do this it's all going to be laid out in a very comprehensive fashion and i want to reiterate as well that in all of your skill sheets for all the skills especially the neuro skills there's examples of normal documentation at the at the end of all the skill sheets so please keep that in mind you have multiple resources at your disposal to help determine the proper way to write a soap note in addition to the ones we'll be doing at lab so how do we write this the neurologic exam would be your mental status. And of course, I'm writing it out here, but you'll be able to use a ton of abbreviations. For instance, A&O times three, ***, normal speech comprehension, speech fluid. You'll be able to shorten a lot of this down. But for a comprehensive exam, we want to lay out the entire Crane and Herb exam so you can see how it's often written. Crane and Herb 1, as you see here, is not tested. In many cases, you won't be testing Crane and Herb 1. Most ERs are going to have you sit there walking around with coffee beans. And what you'll see in most notes, it'll say cranial nerves 2 through 12, mostly intact, bilateral. If everything's negative and normal, you can actually just write that. But for completeness purposes, we want you to see how it's completely written out. So here you have cranial nerves 2 and 3. You can see how it's all written out here. Excuse me. Moving on to cranial nerves 5 through 12. Same thing here. Facial sensation. It goes into very specific detail. Now, it's important to write this out. If, you know, you're doing a comprehensive neuro exam and you find specific deficits, one other way to write it when you're writing your note will be cranial nerves 2 through 12, grossly intact, except for cranial nerve 5 deficit on the left or positive deficit of cranial nerve 12 on the left. You know, so you could write out what's normal, everything's normal, accept, and then do it that way when you're doing your exam. But for completeness sake, I want you to see how each one is individually written down. Again, here's a documentation of the normal exam. Again, painting on herbs, written out, so you can see how you would each write it on each component. Finally, how do we document this in a SOAT note? Again, there's examples of some of these things that we'll be showing more in lab. And after you've given the doorway information here, you have your general appearance. Again, appropriate abbreviations can be used. Patients awake, alert, and oriented. They appear their stated age and well-groomed. And you can see with the HENT, it includes the ocular exam. The visual acuity tests are done here, PERLA, EOMI. Again, using your abbreviations, you'll be able to do that as well. Ear, nose, throat are also included for cleatness sake. so you can see the whole HNT written out. So how do we prepare? How would we like you to prepare for DPR 1 for NeuroLab, which will be soon after this you read this. Please be dressed in appropriate DPR lab attire. Please bring your charge ophthalmoscope visual acuity card. If you don't have one, one will be provided for your pod. We have a few extras. They need to be returned, but you'll be able to use something. But a lot of the kits do come with Rosenbaum cards. In addition, please bring a pen light if you have or a tuning fork. If you only have your phone, you can use the bright light on that, but it's much better if you do have a pen light at your disposal. Finally, review, review, review. Please come to lab prepared. We won't, the labs will be chock full of skills and we get to as many as we can, but we don't always get to all of them. But it is your responsibility to read the skill sheets, practice the skills even before coming to lab. The more prepared you are, the more seamless the transition will be as we go through a very dense two-hour lab period where we're going through all these skills. As you can see, there's a lot of them, and we'll be going over all the cranial nerves in the first lab. So please review your neurologic skill sheets for mental status, cranial nerves, and HDNT. And just always come prepared to lab. It will be so much easier when it comes to being able to help you so that you have at least some experience and knowledge coming in. and hear us listen the references everything comes from bates to john and then the dr schwartz edition for physical diagnosis and that's about it i want to thank you for your time i will see you again when i do the second lecture for the neuroblock um have a wonderful day and i will see you in lab thank you again