Welcome to this prep lecture for OMM lab number 17. Please take a moment to review these session objectives. You have already practiced constrain from multiple regions of the body. And by this point, you are already familiar with its general approach. I've listed some clinical pointers here. Due to its gentle nature, constrain is very safe and versatile when used properly. It can often be combined with other techniques to enhance results. For example, because it is quite effective at reducing tension and tenderness in the soft tissues, it is an option to use counterstrain in order to prepare tissues for HVLA in order to enhance comfort and efficacy. I've listed here some general indications and contraindications for counterstrain, but this also applies really to any OMT. The list is by no means all-inclusive. The most important things are to properly evaluate the patient through your medical and structural examination and approach the patient through a reasonable differential diagnosis with an understanding of potential benefits and risks, and then of course communicating this with the patient so you can obtain informed consent. It is always a good idea to inform patients of what they may experience after OMT. Here is some advice that is generally given to patients after they receive any form of OMT, including counterstrain. Both this and the following slide lists the basic steps of counterstrain. I have also added detail and bold in order for you to provide a comprehensive and effective technique. Even though all the steps might seem tedious, they are quite logical and one flows into the next. So if you approach it through this lens, it should make the memorization piece more manageable and with practice less necessary because again it is quite logical. Please keep in mind that with Counter-Strain, practice in lab because you will be learning several points and learning the various treatment positions there's not enough time to go through the full version with each and every step however you should do this at least several times on your own either in lab as well as practice outside of lab so that you really internalize these steps if we take a moment to look at step number two when we monitor a point, or when we diagnose a point, excuse me, and you decide if a point is tender or not, of course the patient will give you feedback if it's tender or not. That's what you would instruct the patient to do, but there are physical cues too. Patients may react to tenderness by blinking their eyes, grimacing, or withdrawing the body region that you are pushing on. So be aware of the entire range of a patient's responses. You scale the point as a 10 over 10. This is not meant to make the point more tender than it actually is, unless of course it is a 10 over 10, if it's really that tender. However, it's really meant to give both you and the patient an easy starting point, an easy point to remember. So sometimes people describe it as a dollar's worth or ten dollars worth of pain and you and the idea is to get that number to zero or the least amount of pain we try for zero it's not always possible so that's where the fine tuning comes in so again the steps make sense but do review all these steps on both this slide and the following to make sure that you understand them here are some additional pointers for this lab. Because pelvic counter strain points involve the use of the lower extremities to set up the treatment physician, it is particularly important for you to keep in mind proper ergonomics so that you avoid straining your back or arms and the patient remains relaxed and thereby you can optimize both comfort and efficacy of the technique. Please take a moment to review these various pointers to make sure that they make sense to you so that you can provide counter strain effectively. This diagram shows the locations of the anterior pelvic counter strain points. The four purple dots represent the four points you're responsible for in this lab. Because counter strain is an indirect technique and and these are anterior pelvic constrain points, it makes sense that the treatment position of these points involve some degree of hip flexion. And then there are additional details to accomplish the treatment for each of these points. There are also anatomical correlations of these points. The psoas constrain point is thought to represent the psoas major. The low ilium constrain point is thought to represent the psoas minor. These details are found in your handout and you are responsible for learning them for this lab. Before performing any type of HVLA, it is important to provide adequate soft tissue technique. You can choose from among the techniques listed here. If the dysfunction is mild, chances are you will not be choosing HVLA. It does not mean you can't. That depends on your skill level and of course a mild dysfunction will require less force. When you provide soft tissue technique, do it with the intent of reducing the tension in the region of the somatic dysfunction. This will enhance the efficacy of HVLA. Once you proceed to the setup for HVLA, you will get another chance at sensing the barrier that remains. Remember, during the setup, one of the steps is to, once you engage at the barrier, is to gently spring on it. It is not required that you spring on it, but it often is done because it not only can help to reduce the barrier further, but will also give the provider an extra sense of how much of restriction remains for you to thrust through. When you set up the technique, make sure it's comfortable for both you and your partner. Make sure that the table is at a good height. Adjust it accordingly to your height and also make sure that it's well time have the patient breathe in and during the exhalation phase take up the tissue slack and once you reach as close to the end of the barrier meaning towards the end of exhalation then you will provide a quick thrust but keep it low amplitude once that's done promptly return your partner to the neutral position and reassess the somatic dysfunction. Here are two pictures for HVLA for the nominates, both an anteriorly rotated nominate as well as a posteriorly rotated nominate. Each picture captures the moment prior to the thrust. As you can see, the rotated nominate is up towards the provider or towards the ceiling. In each instance, the patient's torso also is turned from both above and below in order to vector into the sacroiliac joint. In the picture on the left, one can see how the arrow which shows the vector force is directed in an anterior but also inferior direction, aiming down towards the patient's hip and leg region. As you can summarize, this is the setup for an anteriorly rotated nominate because the The thrust is aimed at rotating the right anominate in a posterior direction. In the picture on the right, the arrow shows the vector force aiming in an anterior and superior direction towards the provider's abdomen. It is important to realize that in both instances, both for anterior and posterior anominate, that there is proper contact of the provider's forearm on the patient's upper buttock posterior iliac crest region so that there is enough of a contact as the hand or in this instance the forearm should not slide. Also the thrust is high velocity and low amplitude. In order to accomplish this the provider must have the table set up at a proper height and it is important that the patient is also close enough to the provider. Lastly, please be sure that you do not tiptoe as you perform this maneuver, as you should feel stable in your own stance prior to performing the thrust on the patient. Next, we have superior nominate HVLA. In this technique shown for the right side, note how the provider is holding the patient's right leg proximal to the ankle and also in a slightly abducted position. In the picture on the right, the provider is also bending slightly at the knee and leaning back somewhat in order to optimize ergonomics and ability to exert sufficient traction. The traction during the setup is enough to localize to the region and this is fine-tuned by working with the internal rotation and abduction as necessary to feel like you have fully localized to the region. The thrust is then applied in an inferior direction towards the provider using a quick but short thrust. Here we have HVLA for a right inferior nominate shear. Note how the provider's forearm is placed under the right ischial tuberosity. Note how the patient's right foot is placed behind the knee. I know it does not show that exactly in the picture here, but that's the idea to so-called park the foot in the papateal fossa. The vector of force is going to be aimed directly cephalat, meaning towards the patient's head. Here are some important reminders for diagnosing the nominate bones for somatic dysfunction. A complete somatic dysfunction diagnosis includes evaluation of the ***** rami for any asymmetry so that you can make a separate ***** bone somatic dysfunction diagnosis if one is present. With practice, you should be able to accomplish all of this in under a minute. To be efficient at this, make sure that you perform the standing flexion test correctly by placing your thumbs underneath the PSISs and placing them firmly there as the patient bends forward. Make sure that your thumbs do not slide over the PSISs because that can throw your findings off. Also, when you check landmarks for asymmetry in the pelvis, make sure that you name the side that is superior or inferior based on the side of the positive standing flexion test if it is present. When you examine the landmarks between the patient being supine and prone, make sure you reseat the pelvis. You do this by asking the patient to bend at their knees and place their feet on the table and then raise the pelvis off the table briefly and then lower it back onto the table. And then you straighten the legs and check for the pelvic landmarks. This ensures that you are more accurate in noting any asymmetry. This concludes this lab prep lecture for the pelvis. Thank you for your attention.