Hello, students. My name is Dustin Popp. I'm a research scholar, class of 2027, and I'm here to give you a lecture today on the anatomy and the physiology of the neocortex. Before I begin, I just want to thank Dr. Ramos for guiding me and helping me with the creation of this lecture. These are the session objectives for you to read on your own time. However, we will go through all of this in a lecture. So we're going to talk about the neocortex today, but this is a very basic slide just for you to get the basic understanding of what we're looking at here. The neocortex, well, put it this way, the frontal lobe, the temporal lobe, the parietal lobes just posterior to the central sulcus, as well as the occipital lobe have neocortex in them. And the neocortex usually consists of six layers that are organized into sulky, gyri, and these two together create our lobes of those respective parts of the brain, right? And we'll go into detail about each of those parts, the frontal, the temporal, the occipital, as well as the parietal lobe. As you can see, frontal, temporal, occipital, there's a cerebellum, we're not going to get into that today. But we'll go through all of those parts, frontal, temporal, parietal, occipital lobe, and what they do, a little bit about their functioning. And the point I'd like to make here is that that's not all of what the neocortex is and does. There's plenty more areas that we aren't going to talk about in this PowerPoint, and it would take well over a week to discuss everything. And looking at these stains here, this is unstained, and what we see are two different cell types, but two different things that you could pick up on visually. And what you see here is the gray matter. These are the cell bodies of neurons that then project axons, which is this white matter here, to various other parts of the cortex or subcortical structures. So what we see here is the gray matter are the cell bodies that are on the peel surface, and the white matter are the axons of those cell bodies going deep, crossing the corpus callosum or whatever, etc. And moving forward, this is a Nissel stain, so the Nissel stain actually stains those cell bodies, the gray matter specifically, on the peel surface, leaving the white matter tracks untouched. However, you have an axonal stain here that does stain the white matter tracks while leaving the neuronal cell bodies unstained, and this is an MRI. Moving on to the cytoarchitecture of the neocortex, this simply means this is the cellular architecture. So like I said before, usually there are six layers of the neocortex. You can see these concentric sort of layers. You can make them out slightly. It goes from six at the deepest, and one is the most superficial. Layer one having very few neurons, and just mostly those are axons in there. and you can see this is a gyrus that goes into a sulcus that comes into another gyrus and the combination of these things make out lobes and in this box here you can actually visualize some pyramidal cells which we'll see a zoom in on in the next slide and this is zoom in that you have pyramidal cells here one two three and four they look like little pyramids if you will they have a triangular shape at least. And these pyramidal neurons make and release glutamate, and they have spiny dendrites, as you can see here. They also make up 85% of the cortical neurons in the neocortex. The other 15% of the neurons in the cortex are not visualized here. You'll need a different type of stain to visualize them. Those are our non -pyramidal neurons that make and release GABA, and they have non-spiny dendrites usually. Interestingly enough, to think about all of the cells, 75% of all of the cells in the neocortex are actually glia cells, which include astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, and microglia. And you see a circled image of this picture here, these little dots. And those glial cells, the supporting cells, actually make up or actually greater greater number in population than total neurons. It's just something interesting to think about. You have more supporting cells than actual neurons. And in this case, you have here an axon. This is a dendrite, and this is an axon going to subcortical white matter. And there are four prototypical types of connections that are made by excitatory neurons in the neocortex. You have very local, this is number one example, local cortical cortical connections that can occur within one area or within layers of a specific area of the neocortex. Two, you might have longer range cortical cortical areas that might go from one lobe to another, maybe frontal to temporal, for example, on the same hemisphere. Three, for example, this is a interhemispheric or colossal connection that connects these connections generally connect to homotypic areas on opposite sides of the hemisphere. We'll get into that a little bit over here. And four is a connection from the cortex to subcortical structures like the thalamus, the tectum, and the basal ganglia, as well as your limbic system as well. So you can see how that's how sort of maybe your thinking area of your frontal cortex might make connections with emotional structures, such as the limbic system. In these two pictures, what we see here is you see a dye is injected into the gray matter, the neurons of a particular side of the motor cortex in a rodent here. And the dye takes up, the cell bodies take up the dye, and the dye then travels along the axons of those neurons and travels to the the targets of those axons so for example the cell bodies of the motor cortex in example one here have axons that project to the contralateral motor cortex as well as the caudate and parts of the basal ganglia and what you're seeing here is the dye's dye fills the neurons at the site of the injection and labels the axon targets of those neurons you see a very similar picture here dye is inserted into the somatosensory cortex and the dye travels along the axons you can see highlighting the axonal projections of those neurons in the somatosensory cortex as it projects to the contralateral cortex as well as the thalamus and in a zoomed in picture here you see those the dye highlighting these axons from those, the contralateral neurons that were injected with the dye. And with all of these connections, you can start to see how one area of the brain might be connected to another area of the brain. And these connections underpin the biology that drive complex human behavior, such as emotional regulation, as well as sensual motor integration. And trying to figure out all these connections and what they do, it can make it very hard understand what neural pathways are responsible for certain behaviors emotions or feelings and an example i bring up is what neuronal pathways could be aberrant in generalized anxiety disorder and going forward here and understanding the difference in the cytoarchitecture of different lobes and gyrae and sulci in various parts of the neocortex as well as using functional maps will help us understand how the neocortex works and for example um you have the central sulcus here that divides which is sulcus that divides the motor cortex from the somatosensory cortex and the point of this slide is really for you to realize that you can have different cellular histology different cytoarchitecture in different lobes of the brain that have their own respective function. And this is sort of what Broadman was getting into back in the 1900s. He identified about 50 areas based on histology of the tissue, and those histology maps relatively accurately match onto different tissue functions as well. For example, the neocortex is designed and looks a specific way in the auditory cortex compared to, let's say, Broca's area, which would be located roughly over here. The cells look different, and Brodman understood that, and he classified them with different Brodman areas. And thus, they also have different functions as well. Another example of this is that there's a very unique cell type visualized here with Nguyen stain, which is a neuronal biomarker. And what you see is that this is what we call a BEDS neuron, and they're particularly unique to the layer 5b of the primary motor cortex. Notice they're very big neurons, and they send projections via the corona radiata to the corticospinal tract. And this is an example of a unique cytoarchitecture component of the motor cortex that is only found in one layer of the neocortex. and for example this type of cell will will not be found in the auditory cortex so that's that's the whole point of this slide is realizing that there are different cells different cell types different cytoarchitectural designs that exist in different lobes of the brain that tie into the different functions of those areas now in terms of learning about the different parts of the human neocortex and what they do, we have four major ways that we could learn about this. This is technically something called functional neuroanatomy. And the first is we can have clinical case reports. These are documented brain injuries, neoplasm, or vascular events that occur in a specific area of the brain with a correlated behavioral and clinical deficit. For example, injuries, lesions to Wernicke's and Broca's area creating two different types of aphasia. Bernke is causing receptive aphasia and Broca is causing a spoken or conductive aphasia. And injury to a specific area naturally provides a clue of the function of that area. This unfortunately requires rigorous histopathology as well as sophisticated MRI imaging and not all injury or pathology is similar in extent or location among different patients so the results can be difficult to interpret. You could also use functional MRI. Functional MRI measures brain activity based on increasing blood flow to a specific area of the brain, and it's useful for learning about brain activity in specific regions during behavioral sensory as well as motor tasks. A limitation is that the behavior is limited in an MRI environment as well as the resolution can be limited. And functional MRI can only capture activity of groups of neurons, and it can't record the activity of a single neuron. You could also use electric brain stimulation. This can be coupled with behavioral observation during neurosurgery. We'll actually see some examples of this in some videos later on that I will show you. And the stimulation is probably being performed during surgery for a tumor or epilepsy treatment, And it can help the person also know what pathways to avoid during surgery. For example, don't cut Broca's area when sizing a lymphoma. And the cons of this is that there are limited regions that can be sampled. And usually patients undergoing this, they don't have healthy brains. They might have had a ******, a tumor, or it's not necessarily like a healthy control, if you will. And you could also do electrical recording of neuronal activity during a cognitive behavioral task, and the recording is probably performed during surgery for a tumor or epilepsy, like electrical brain stimulation, and limitations that these patients usually don't have healthy brains. now moving forward we're going to start to talk about some of the respective lobes and their functions and we'll start from the front we'll go talk about the frontal cortex and as you guys probably know already the frontal lobe is involved in executive function voluntary motor function as well as speech emotion and cognition and to actually define what executive function are is You could describe it as including but not limited to setting and maintaining goals, planning, a sense of delayed gratification, organizing, planning, initiating, inhibiting certain behaviors in certain settings, as well as self -moderating, evaluating, thinking about yourself, acting strategically, problem-solving, shifting between cognitive and effective cognitive and affective sets as well as controlling your cognitive functions and managing moment to moment events so things that sort of make us be able to operate at job at jobs between people interacting between individuals between peers this is the area of the brain that's highly active in all of this Um, and also to remind you, uh, you have the premotor cortex as well as supplemented motor areas that are in the frontal lobe and which means that the frontal lobe can have a role in the planning and organization and the exact executing complex motor tasks. And I would like to note that the prefrontal cortex is really specifically involved in a lot of these executive function tasks, while more posteriorly of the part of the frontal lobe is the motor cortex. So just a little bit of nuance there, but just no frontal lobe. I'm not really going to be testing you specifics about the prefrontal cortex. And the frontal lobe, Since it's involved in those higher-order functions, such as emotional regulation, empathy, planning, etc., you can imagine that injury or illness to the frontal lobe can affect mood as well as can cause certain psychopsychiatric diseases. A very famous example of this is that you have Philly Phineas Gage, who got a piece of iron struck through his orbital frontal cortex. He was once a loving husband and father, and after the incident, he became short-tempered, brash, and he was prone to devise and then abandon any plans he made. And this is a great case study example of where you have frontal lobe injury to a specific part of your brain that leads to various changes in personality, affect, and social behavior. Another instance where you could have illness or a tumor causing a psychiatric condition is with frontal lobe meningiomas, which are growths of the meninges, tumor of the meninges. And the meningeal overgrowth is compressing, damaging, changing biochemistry of the neurons in the frontal cortex, and maybe some of those neurons are involved with executive function, and it's not uncommon for patients with frontal lobe meningiomas to have depression or schizophrenia or other some type of psychiatric disorder. on the right here uh back into the 30s frontal lobotomy was developed to treat psychiatric illnesses such as schizophrenia by severing connections to the frontal lobe and we see two mris here where you have some parts of the frontal lobe that were cut out right and the procedure was very effective in blending mood and affect and relieving clinical symptoms especially in suicidal patients, but it's no longer used due to advances in pharmacotherapy, as well as moral and ethical needs. I'm sure you might hear about this in another lecture, but we'll mention it here. We're talking about a frontal temporal dimension, a behavioral variant. And what you can make of it is that what you see in this image here, this is normal, where you see very healthy, sulky gyri and it doesn't look like there's much atrophy in this patient's frontal lobe as well as their temporal lobe however in this patient in the ftd patient you can see significant atrophy in the frontal lobe you can see thinning of gyri and widening of the sulci and that is reflective of a disease process here, which is caused by these mutations in MAPT, which encodes for tau. And you can see these tau aggregates here on the side. And it makes sense that damage and atrophy to the cells of the frontal as well as the temporal lobe will cause some of these symptoms here, like deficits in executive function, such as poor decision-making, judgment, problem-solving, organization skills. Patient will have difficulty planning the day's activities. They may make questionable financial decisions and have on-the -job mistakes. There's usually a lack of inhibition, so the patient has disinnovative behavior, such as loss or lack of restraint based on social norms. This can lead to inappropriate behavior and impulsivity. The behaviors can include making uncharacteristic or rude or offensive comments. Boards love this, ignoring other people's social or personal space, reckless spending, touching strangers or inappropriate ****** behavior, as well as aggressive outbursts and apathy. An interesting point is that the disease onset is between 45 and 65 it's slightly younger than alzheimer's patients the page could also have indifference or lack of interest in previously meaningful activities as well as a neglected personal hygiene you could have a loss of initiative emotional blunting loss of warmth or empathy or concern for others and you can see that this disease not only affects the individual but everyone that this patient is associated with We're not going to spend much time on this. I believe you guys had some of this in another lecture, but the frontal lobe area 8, which you see here and you see here, is vital for rapid saccadic voluntary eye movement. This area sends axonal projections to the PPRF, the paramedian pontine reticular formation. This is in the pons. And the PPRF then sends projections to the abducens nuclei as well as the ocular motor nerve nuclei to carry out voluntary eye movement. And what you see is that electrical recordings show action potentials in area 8. before eye movements moving on to the primary motor cortex what we see is that it's the pre-central gyrus here just anterior to our central sulcus and this produces voluntary movements and it sends projections to the spinal cord and you know it from the homunculus you have a lot more neurons devoted to moving a finger in face musculature due to over a highly large representation on the homunculus compared to let's say somewhere on like for the knee for example the afferents come from motor vestibular and sensory systems like catching a football with your hands or catching yourself from tripping down the stairs and the efferents project to the thalamus the brain stem the spinal cord as well as the basal ganglion for voluntary motor movements and electrical stimulation will cause muscle twitches so if i hook an electrode up to the medial part of the primary motor cortex where your hip is, you could stimulate hip flexion there. And what's cool is that in patients with an intact motor cortex, but with a spinal cord injury, so paralyzed patients that may have undergone or suffered trauma to their spinal cord, and they might be effectively paralyzed, but their motor cortex is intact, what you we can do is you can encode neuronal activity from motor areas and put that information into a computer and that computer can then take that encoded intention from the patient's motor cortical areas and can tell a prosthetic limb to then move to what the patient wants the oral prosthetic arm to do thus bypassing the patient's spinal cord and what we'll see is some videos of this so the patient's controlling the arm and angling it all with intention from her motor cortex the intention for those actions is being recorded from her motor cortex sent into a computer that then encodes those commands and tells the arm to do what she wants. Moving forward, we're going to talk about the cortical anatomy of speech production. And there's this man named Paul Pierre Broca, and he's what we name Broca's aphasia aft for. And what you see here, this is Broca's area involved in speech production. People who have strokes to this area or trauma may suffer from what we call Broca's aphasia or expressive aphasia, where they can't form words, yet they will still understand them. And what's interesting you see is that this is your motor strip, and you have motor control of the mouth and lips right here, and very close to it is Broca's area. So that sort of makes sense that these two areas are close to each other, and they might be related in function. And notice also you have Wernicke's area over here as well as your angular gyrus which we'll get into later. And it's also important to realize that Broca's area receives inputs from auditory as well as motor areas. Auditory being over here and motor being over here. So now we've hopped over the central sulcus. Now we're in the postcentral gyrus which contains our primary somatosensory cortex, which is S1, and this is involved in higher-order sensory processing as well as visual and spatial attention. And as we see here, very similarly with the motor cortex, there's a lot of more neurons devoted to sensation for skin on the fingers as well as the face. Now, talking about issues with the parietal lobe, specifically right posterior parietal lobe damage will cause a spatial hemi neglect so what is that so a hemi neglect is a lack of attention towards one side of the body and one side of the world so usually the left side uh patients will put clothes or makeup on on one side of the body note this is not a visual problem there's nothing wrong with the visual pathways that you have gone over this is simply an issue of a higher level processing of the aferent incoming sensory stimuli from the occipital lobe. So the parietal lobe is just not appraising the visual information that the occipital lobe has created. It's usually seen with large lesions to the right, usually non-dominant posterior parietal lobe, and the artery supplying this brain region is the right MCA. The right posterior parietal lobe is involved in spatial processing for both left and right sides. And the right posterior parietal lobe seems to play a role in visual appraisal and attention to the world around us. And the primary visual cortex has projections to the parietal lobe, which you'll probably see in another lecture. And we'll go through some of these images here. So what we have here is this is a model, and the patient is asked to copy the model on the left. And the patient tries to copy that model from memory, but what they only draw is only the right side of all of these images, only the right side of the clock, the right side of the house, the right side of the flower. Here, the patient is asked to draw lines through the middle sections of these lines as it's done here. However, only the right side is done. There is a hemi-neglect of the left side here as there's no lines through them. and i would like to note here all the tests that are shown are administered by putting up the paper right in front of their face so that let the left and right visual fields can be assessed when this is done the patient only fills out one side of the paper likely crossing like likewise in crossing the lines or in the circle stars task here right so the patient's shown this but they're only circling on the right side so it's not that they're not seeing this they're just not appraising that this visual information is there, and they're not circling it. Another part of the parietal lobe is the angular gyrus, and you see the angular gyrus right here, and lesions to the angular gyrus, which is part of the inferior parietal lobe, can lead to agraphia as well as alexia, and agraphia is deficits in writing, and alexia deficits in reading words, and this area is also vital for assigning meaning to words. The angular gyrus is what we call a heteromodal association area, meaning that integrates sensory information from visual, auditory, as well as other sensory areas. It helps link areas the brain associated with memory, spatial cognition, and language together. And the angular gyrus shows increased activity in fMRI during reading and writing. and damage to the angular gyrus can also cause mouth calculation issues, and we see the angular gyrus here. Now, like we said before, damage to the left angular gyrus is actually called Gerstmann syndrome, and this occurs when there's a ****** or injury to the dominant hemisphere affecting the left inferior parietal lobe in the region of the left angular gyrus, And this consists of four clinical signs, dysgraphia, agraphia, leading to writing deficits, dyscalculia, leading to impaired arithmetic calculation abilities. You could have right and left disorientation, which is difficulty identifying right versus left side of your body, as well as finger agnosia, which is the inability to distinguish or identify individual fingers. I'm not going to talk much about the occipital lobe. We've had a lot of lectures relating to visual pathways, but what we see here is that the occipital lobe is involved in receiving visual information and creating images from what we see. And what we see here is the occipital lobe is sending projections to the posterior parietal lobe as well as the inferior temporal cortex here. So what we see is that the occipital lobe is projecting to these higher-order processing areas for that information to be processed. Moving on to the temporal lobe, the temporal lobe has roles in audition, as well as memory and higher-order visual processing, as well as spatial navigation. So you can stick a taxi cab driver in an fMRI, and you can ask them to think about navigating the streets of Manhattan or wherever they are, getting from point A to point B. And what you'll see is that as they're thinking about their route, the temporal lobe, both of them most likely, will actually show increased blood flow on an fMRI. The temporal lobe contains the primary auditory cortex, damage to which leads to auditory deficits. You could also have a Wernicke's area is also in the temporal lobe here, right? And damage to the Wernicke's area can cause a Wernicke's aphasia, which is the inability to comprehend spoken language. This can often lead to confabulation. And another important note about the temporal lobe is it helps us listen to speech and then respond properly with fluid language. And what we see here is this arcuate fasciculus is a white matter tract that connects Wernicke's area to Broca's area. Moving forward, like we said before, the temporal lobe has a role in audition, memory, higher order visual processing, as well as spatial navigation. And a specific part of the temporal lobe is the fusiform face area, fusiform gyrus. And damage to this specific area will actually lead to something called prosopagnosia, which is the inability to recognize faces after damage to this area. So the patient will be shown a face, but they will describe it as a blur or something else, and they won't be able to recognize the face of that person, but they will still be able to recognize the voice of that person. That's a different neuronal pathway that is left untouched. And interestingly enough, these areas in the temporal lobe show increased activation following the presentation of faces. But specifically, we'll just talk about the FFA, causing prosopagnosia. And here is an example of this. Electrical implants are placed in this patient's fusiform face area, the FFA, And the stimulation will perturb this patient's neuronal physiology and will lead to a distortion of the physician's face. something else. Your whole face is sort of metamorphosed. Did it get warped? Yes. Did it shape? Now going off of the temporal lobe, we'll specifically talk about the medial temporal lobe, which does include our hippocampus here. You see that cinnamon bun-like shape for hippocampus. The medial temporal lobe is particularly vulnerable to injury after head trauma, and what you see is a tau staining can be actually used as a neuronal injury marker. And this is a healthy brain, a normal brain, while this is unfortunately the brain of a pro football player, and you can see a lot of tau staining indicating neuronal injury in a lot of these areas, specifically an area devoted to memory, like the hippocampus and the medial temporal lobe. In addition, the medial temporal lobe is vulnerable to injury in Alzheimer's disease. And I mentioned this here, whether tau accumulation is the cause of memory loss or some event preceding tau creation is essentially unknown at this point. Why I say this is because we are now using monoclonal antibodies to help try to clear out tau in Alzheimer's patients. And one would think that this would completely reverse the memory loss scene if you completely clear out tau. However, this is not necessarily the case even after treatment with some of these drugs. Yes, they lower the tau burden, but you don't have complete recovery of memory. Memory doesn't return back to baseline. So it's possible that the issue leading to memory loss may occur upstream to tau creation. But that, like I said, is under a heavy amount of research at this point in time. However, using monoclonals to help clear out plaques is useful for patients still. And the damage to the neurons here is correlated with memory loss and function. This is a normal patient with healthy medial temporal lobe. While this is a patient with Alzheimer's, you can see much more tau staining reflecting these are dying neurons here. Two other lobes we'll talk about are the insular cortex, as well as the cingulate cortex here, right on the midline. And less is known about these areas compared to primary sensory areas. Here is the insula, you have the anterior part of the insula, as well as the posterior part of the insula. so the insular cortex is involved in various amount of myriad of functions including gustation olfaction vestibular sensations pleasure reward addiction as well as visceral and autonomic functions and this the insular cortex receives input related to those areas we'll get into in a little bit. It's also a hub for interoception and translates interoceptive inputs into conscious feelings. And damage to the interlobe can cause various different clinical pictures. So in this huge diagram, which you do not have to memorize at all, what you see is information like body pain, visceral pain, temperature, metabolism, tissue stress, etc., head pain, touch, tongue, taste, not touch, tongue, tasting, et cetera, as well as visceral information from your heart, lungs, your gut, your kidney, et cetera, all essentially get funneled through various different pathways to different parts of the insula that sort of appraise and comprehend all of this information, this visceral and autonomic information from all these different organs it's also important to realize that the insular cortex is activated in taste in ransom food as well as stimuli that are deemed to be morally disgusting and uh this is seen uh via fmri and i got this from a book that i'm reading by robert sapolsky he's a dr robert sapolsky he's a neuroscientist and um yeah i just think that's This is pretty interesting how the insular cortex, which was evolved a while ago, millions of years ago, to help us taste rancid food. When you would taste rancid food, the insular cortex would light up, and this would stimulate a mammal's version of vomiting. However, as we've developed and as a society, if this area of the brain will also light up, if a patient deems something to be morally disgusting, for example, if you stick a patient in an fMRI and have them think about violence, murder, etc., things like that, this area will actually light up. And it's just interesting how evolution doesn't necessarily create new structures, it just sort of adds on to what's already available for it. And in this case, the insular cortex added this function of being activated with moral disgust. interestingly enough damage to the insular cortex in this 2007 paper really helped patients decrease their drive to smoke cigarettes the insula is necessary for the ability to consciously appreciate and derive pleasure and it's also necessary for the sensation of urges like to like to smoke in smokers. That urge is very strong. And what you see here is that damage to the insular lobe, you can see here, actually makes the drive to smoke much less. And this is exciting because this could be a possibly a new area to target with novel drugs or TMS in the future. And what we see here is a patient undergoing neurosurgery and their insular cortex is being stimulated. And I'll play this video for you. It was a little low. I apologize for that. But essentially what happened was she received a lower dose stimulation initially and she reported tasting chocolate. But as the intensity increased, as well as the duration of the stimulus, you can see the expression on her face turn to disgust as she believes she tasted bad chocolate with the stimulation. And that is an example of one of the functions of the insular cortex. Moving on to the cingulate cortex, the cingulate cortex has roles in cognition, emotion, memory, as well as the four Fs, which are feeding, fighting, flighting, and fornicating. You can see the cingulate cortex here as part of the papus circuit, sending projections to the hippocampus while receiving sensory information from the thalamus and other sensory areas here. Interestingly enough, patients who have drug -resistant depression or OCD could potentially benefit from a bilateral anterior cingulotomy. This is taken from a patient one week after surgery. You can see two lesions here in the anterior cingulate, as well as right here and here. You could also use a bilateral anterior cingulotomy for the treatment of chronic pain. This patient here suffered from metastatic bone pain, which was completely eliminated after surgery, and the effect remained for 20 months. And the surgery is safe and can be effective depending on numerous factors. cingulotomies can also be considered for post -herpetic neurology as well as trigeminal neurology and this is just showing you that you have Columbia University as Presbyterian in the city that do cingulotomies currently and this here is just an example of if you stimulate the anterior cingulate cortex you could induce laughter As you can see, this individual is given a dose of electricity, and you can see them smile. So that is about all I have today. We covered a lot. We talked about the neocortex. We talked about the side architecture of the neocortex, as well as different types of cells that exist in the neocortex. We talked about different cortical areas, including the sensory areas, motor areas, and cognitive areas. And we talked about connections between areas and within these areas as well. And we also talked about how particular stimulation or damage to a brain area can affect and change behavior. So I'll go over one question with you, maybe two, depending on how much time I have. um there are about four or five questions in here um feel free to do them and get back to me if you have any questions about them but here 55 year old man is brought into the family medicine clinic because of a recent change in behavior over the last two years once a sweet and reserved man the patient is now yelling obscene comments at his co -workers on the job his wife also reports that he has gotten much ruder and less empathetic to her needs over the last two years he has also spent $40 ,000 in the last month gambling. What is the most likely diagnosis and the gene associated with the diagnosis? Pause it if you need, and the answer is, this is an example of frontal temporal dementia. Next question. A 38 -year-old man gets hit in the head by a rock that was thrown at him. It is noticed that the man cannot voluntarily move his eyes from side to side. What brain area is most likely affected? The frontal area 8, like we talked about. And last question, I'll go over. A patient suffers an ischemic ****** in the right MCA about a week after the ****** while the patient's recovering in the hospital. A family member noticed the patient only eating food on the right side of his plate. When asked to draw a clock, he does this. what is the most likely diagnosis. This is an example of hemispatial neglect. That's all I'll go over. If you guys have any questions, please let me know. Thank you for your time and have a lovely day.