Hello students in Jonesboro and Westbury, Dr. Ramos here again and today we'll be talking about neocortical development. We don't have time in the curriculum to talk about the development of all the different parts of the brain like the cerebellum, thalamus, or spinal cord, but we're going to use this one lecture to go over one part of the developing brain, the neocortex that is, to connect also with our neuroembryology lecture and just to give a picture of how the proliferation and migration of cells come together in the neocortex to grow this part of the brain, right? The development of the neocortex has been studied in a little bit more detail than other parts of the brain, so we have a better understanding of the molecular, genetic, and cellular players, and we understand how neocortical malformations arise. So this is why this is the best topic for one specific lecture on the development of a particular part of the brain. And I'll be walking you through the major steps in the development of the neocortical architecture that we are already pretty familiar with from earlier lectures. Here are the session objectives taken directly from the CPG, so I'm not going to go over them. I like to think about brain development and neocritical development in terms of three Ps. And we will go over two of those Ps in this lecture. The first is neuronal production, which relates to the proliferation of neurons, right, to appropriately populate the brain in general, or in this case, to appropriately populate the cerebral cortex. In many parts of the body and many organ systems, not only do you have proliferation, but then you have cellular placement. So that's the second P, which is that process where cells have to be placed into particular parts of that tissue or organ, right? And in the neocortex placement has to do here with the migration of neurons into their appropriate layer. So you all remember that the neocortex has a laminated cytoarchitecture, right? With horizontally arranged neurons, one on top of the other. And then finally, once you have the right numbers of cells, the first P, and they're in the right place, the second P, now when it comes to the brain, we know that there is circuitry that can be formed, the synaptic connections, which then allows for the last P, which is the performance of that circuit or the physiology of that circuit, right? And together, all these three P's create the amazing organ, the brain, that controls our behavior. All right, so as I said, by now you're all familiar with the general architecture of the cortex with its sulci and its gyri, its six layers, several different cell neuron types and glial types. Remember that the majority of neurons in the neocortex are pyramidal cells that have spiny dendrites, have axons that make local and long-range connections with other parts of cortex and subcortical areas as well right and these pyramidal neurons are glutamatergic they have elaborate dendrites with spines so let's get started with the first p which is neuronal production and obviously what we're talking about here is a dramatic change in the size and the convolutions of the brain that you can see here in this pictorial representation of the gross brain changes that one sees from p from 21 weeks to about 40 weeks which is uh right around the time of normal birth and obviously the brain is growing remarkably in size because of cellular proliferation proliferation right and the neocortex is changing from a smooth surface a smooth surface like you see over here to a surface full of sulci and gyri including the development of those neuronal layers that we talk about and it's interesting that layering is a characteristic feature of many other tissues not just the brain so it seems like in the process of of the brain growing and evolving in in mammals it adapted a similar architecture like you see in other organs and tissues like skin or or bone etc all right we're going to continue the discussion from the neuroembryology lecture, which remember took you through neuralation, formation of the neural tube closure. We talked about the primary vesicles that grew and expanded into the secondary vesicles. And now we're moving into focusing on the telencephalon, right? The telencephalon, which is those two vesicles that develop into the lateral ventricles and where we we have progenitor cells that will divide and make the neurons of the cerebral cortex. So here we have histology from a 10-week-old fetus where we can see a large lateral ventricle, and right along the lateral ventricles where we have the progenitor cells that will divide to produce the cortical neurons, right, and if we zoom in into this area here and move over here to the right-hand side, we're looking at three different weeks, three different time periods of that same region as the neocortex is beginning to develop. All of this area in white that you see down here is going to be the lateral ventricle. Okay, so at six weeks, six and a half weeks of gestation, we pretty much only have two layers. We have the marginal zone up here, right, which becomes layer one, and we have the neural epithelial layer shown here. And now notice that we have a group of cells up here in the marginal zone called the Cajal Cajalretzius cells, right? Cajalretzius cells, Cajalretzius cells over here. We'll come back to these cells, but just remember that they are in the marginal zone, which becomes layer one. And now let's look at how by at eight weeks, we now have this extra layer of cells appearing in what will be what is called the cortical plate, right that we didn't have that that layer of cells at six and a half weeks or seven weeks so now we have the cortical plate well what's happened here is that we had neuronal proliferation and migration from the neural epithelial areas right that are now building the neocortical architecture, right? And the cells that are creating these cells again are here in the neural epithelial layer. All right, let's continue growing the cortex from eight weeks to eight and a half weeks of gestation. Let's look at the size of the cortical plate here at eight weeks, right? And look at the size at eight and a half weeks of the cortical plate, right? So this is kind of almost doubled in thickness. And again, look at the thickness of the entire tissue in general, right? Almost doubling in size. And again, what we have is we have continued proliferation from neural epithelial cells down here, and we have migration of these neurons radially in towards the peel surface into the cortical plate. Remember that ultimately we're going to end up having our six layers of neocortex, like we see here, where we're going to have sulci and gyri, lobes, and something of note is that layer one, which we see over here, is pretty much always devoid of lots of cells. So here's all of layer one over here. If we zoom in, Here is layer one, right? There are cells in layer one, but they're mostly glia. And it's layer two through six, two through six here, that has the majority of neurons. And remember, the cortical architecture starts from layer one at the most peel surface and going down to layer six all the way till we get to the white matter, okay? So we have neurons being produced over time by neural epithelial cells, and the cells that are capable of dividing and making the neurons are called radial glia, like we see here, radial glia. The radial glia are located in divide at the ventricular zone, which is this area right here, right along the border of the lateral ventricle. So this is also the ventricular zone over here. right? And as newborn neurons are being born and migrate into cortical plate, right? The cortical plate is going to keep getting bigger and bigger. Layer one is not getting thicker because those cells don't migrate into layer one, except in some pathological conditions that we'll talk about. And I should make sure to mention that there are lots of different names for this layer one up here, marginal zone, molecular layer, layer one. And again, zooming into this area, we see over here there are cells, but not a lot of neurons. Let's take a closer look at those radioglia. So we're going to be zooming in on this red box, which is this big picture that we see here, right? And then if we zoom into this little red box, now we get to see this picture here. And I hope you can see that if we zoom, as we zoom in further and further, we're right here at the ventricular zone surface, we can catch some of those radioglial cells that are dividing, right? I hope you can see that this is the classic shape of a dividing cell in one stage of mitosis here, right? Now, if you label these cells with more sophisticated techniques, so let's say you express a fluorescent protein, what you see is a cell that looks like this, okay? And this edge right here is the ventricular zone, right? So this cell has a radially oriented shape, and it's got a cell body, which we see here, and it's got one process, one fiber, kind of like a dendrite, but we call it a radial fiber that touches the peel surface and another fiber that touches the edge of the ventricular zone surface. And that's how they got their name, radioglia, because of these radial fibers. And what we're going to do is with this cell that's labeled with our green fluorescent protein, we're going to use video microscopy to track this radial glial cell over time. So this red arrow represents time. And we can look at the cell's behavior. And what you see is that the radial glia does a dance, a little bit of a dance, but will tend to dock right at the ventricular zone surface right here. And it's at the VZ where you see this one radial glial cell divide and now become two cells, right? Can you see that? So now we have one and two. One and two. We're tracking this cell over time. And now here it's very obvious where we have two cells, okay? And this cartoon over here does a great job of illustrating what I'm trying to show which is that we go from one radioglial cell labeled with r that divides and now we have the daughter cell which is in dark green okay so this is the process of neuronal proliferation which is making the cells the pyramidal cells that then populate the neocortex all right so why is it important to understand neuronal proliferation and particularly proliferation for the neocortical development well it's because there are disorders of neuronal production that result in a condition known as primary microcephaly. Microcephaly is defined as a small head and small brain in children under the 25th percentile or so, for example. You can see here the size of the horizontal MRI in the sagittal plane and in the horizontal plane of a normal 13-year-old female, right, and compare that to an age-matched female with microcephaly caused by ASPM mutation, right, on these two left-hand sides. So you see a dramatic reduction in skull and brain size. Surprisingly, the brain architecture looks pretty similar between the two brains. So all the different brain nuclei are in the right place, but it's just a dramatic reduction in brain size because of the deficit in neuronal production of these radioglial cells, right? And the gene that causes this microcephaly in this patient is ASPM, which stands for abnormal spindle pole mutant. And ASPM, like we're seeing in this staining over here, is important for mitotic profiles of dividing cells at different stages of the cell cycle, right? And just to show you how important this gene is across mammals, you can see that gene knockout of ASPM and ferret, like you see here, this is the knockout for ASPM, cause microcephaly in the ferret compared to the normal brain, right? So this gene and its encoded protein are important in cell division in radioglia and is conserved in primates, carnivores, and mice. And so what we're talking about here is that ASPM is important for our radioglial cells down here that are dividing along the ventricular zone, right? And if these cells cannot divide properly, then you're going to end up with a smaller population of newborn neurons and potentially microcephaly. Another great example of primary microcephaly comes from individuals with a mutation in a gene called citron kinase. So here are two affected children, here one and here two, that have microcephaly due to the mutation in citron kinase. and we also know that citron kinase mutation in rats causes microcephaly. So look at the small head and these animals also have a small brain compared to a normal animal of the same age and citron kinase knockout in mice also causes microcephaly. So here is the citron kinase knockout mouse compared the size of the brain to the normal animal with functional citron kinase. All right, and just like ASPM, citron kinase plays an important role in cell division. But instead of being like ASPM being in the spindles, citron kinase is localized and important for cytokinesis. So it's localized at the cleavage furrow and plays a role in those final steps where the two daughter cells are going to disconnect from each other, right? And so the consequence of that failed cytokinesis in humans and rats and mice, like I said, these mutations have been found in humans, rats, and mice. the consequence is that you have neurons with multiple nuclei so I'm showing you the three zoomed in cells where you can see multiple nuclei from the neocortex of a human microcephaly patient with mutation of citron kinase and over here I'm showing images of rat binucleate neurons, right, from a rat that also had mutation in citron kinase. So again, what we're talking about here is radioglial cells needing all these different molecular and genetic players for cell division. And if anything goes wrong in the physiology or the mechanics of cell division, be it because of abnormal spindles or because the strong kinase at the cleavage furrow, you're going to end up with fewer produced neurons, which can cause microcephaly. Instead of microcephaly, you can see the opposite condition known as megalencephaly, where you have prolonged proliferation of radioglia, which is going to cause an overproduction of neurons, right? So take a look at the normal MRI here that we see compared to two patients on the right that have hemi-megalencephaly. So one hemisphere, this hemisphere here in the coronal and in the horizontal, this one hemisphere here, is enlarged and in this patient this other hemisphere here and here is enlarged right because of the again the prolonged proliferation of radioglial cells you can also show this experimentally in in animal models by again mutating the molecular and genetic environment of radial glia to cause them to proliferate abnormally or for abnormal periods of time or to inhibit them from stopping to proliferate. And you can create a giant megalencephalic mouse brain like you see here compared to the normal brain, right? And notice how the normal mouse brain is normally flat, whereas when you produce activating mutations in proliferation genes, you see that now you actually get sulci and gyri in the mouse brain, which is not normally the case. So again, understanding the biology of radioglia and the genes and molecules that regulate their proliferation help us to understand conditions like microcephaly versus megalencephaly. All right, so one more time in summary of this part, neuronal production refers to the proliferation of neurons in order to appropriately populate the brain. Radioglial cells are those proliferative cells that divide to make up neurons at the ventricular zone of the neural epithelium, and too much or too little of neuronal production leads to microcephaly or megalencephaly. And so now we're going to switch gears from proliferation to neuronal placement and how each subsequent round of neurons being made, how does that then tie into the evolution of the layers and the formation of the layers, better put. And again, the six-layer side or architecture of the neocortex is the defining organization of this part of the brain and what helps the circuitry of all the different functions that the neocortex is able to perform. So to understand neuronal placement we're going to have to go back to our little cartoon and we're going to track our radioglial cell again which we saw earlier. Let's look at this expanded cartoon of our radioglial cell at the ventricular zone. We also have our marginal zone up here, so the peel surface up here, and we have our developing cortical plate, right? And remember that we have our radioglial cell here in green. As we mentioned earlier, our radioglial cell likes to dock at the ventricular zone surface. It will divide and create a daughter cell, shown here in dark green. Notice how the daughter cell in dark green begins to move away from the ventricular zone, right, and adopts this particular shape that we call the bipolar shape, right, and it's moving radially and gets some help from the radial fiber. Then around this other area known as the subventricular zone and intermediate zone, so in this region, right, we're tracking the daughter cell. Notice how the daughter cell changes shape from bipolar to multipolar. And instead of migrating radially, it will do a dynamic dance here in the intermediate zone. And we'll talk about how the intermediate zone becomes the white matter of the mature neocortex. Okay. It's not entirely certain what sort of information the daughter cell is getting here in the intermediate zone. but this to be appears to be a characteristic where the the daughter cell changes its shape and movement patterns and then the daughter cell might go uh down might you know even go a little further down to the ventricular zone but eventually it will um change its shape again become radial in shape and it will migrate radially up to the cortical plate. So here's the cortical plate here. Remember the cortical plate is what is going to become the mature six-layer cortex. So I've labeled that here, two, three, four, five, six. And remember layer one is up here um in the marginal zone right now let's while this daughter cell is migrating let's look at what our radial glial cell does it divides once again right and notice how this second daughter cell that is uh colored in in in white right will pretty much engage in the same journey and the same morphological change and dynamic movement as its older sister daughter cell did, right? So if we think about these two, the dark green cell and the white cell as sister cells, right? From the same radial glial cell, you know, let's say mom as the example, right? So what we're seeing in this cartoon is the combination of proliferation from the radioglial cell in multiple rounds of division and the migration of those daughter cells, right, as they ultimately end up into the cortical plate. And let's add one more element to this, which is that with each round of proliferation, the next wave of daughter cells will migrate past the earlier daughter cells and migrate on top of that earlier born daughter cell to produce an inside-out pattern of lamination. So what I mean is that can you see here how the first daughter cell in dark green might end up in, let's say, layer five, right? And what we see is that the second daughter cell here in white is going to migrate just a bit higher, just a bit higher up to a, a higher cortical layer. Let me, let me, let me go over that again one more time with a different cartoon that might make it a little bit more clear. So we have our radioglial cell that divides and makes a first daughter cell. And we're going to track the radioglial cell and the daughter cell over time, of course. And notice how the daughter cell, number one, migrates into the cortical plate, right? While it's migrating, the radioglial cell divides again, we see here, and makes a second daughter cell. And, um, notice how this, this second round daughter cell migrates past the earlier one. So here we have the first round and now the second round daughter cell. And while daughter cell number two is migrating, our radial glial cell divides again. and this round of daughter cells is going to migrate on top of both of those earlier born and what we see here is daughter cell three ultimately migrates above one and two and and uh shown here is also that the fourth round daughter cell migrated above all of them. So this is known, again, as the inside -out radial migration to establish the neocortical layers. There are now sophisticated techniques to label the daughter cells of radioglia using retroviruses and encoding fluorescent proteins. And here in this picture, we have four daughter cells that were born from one radioglial cell. And what we can see is, first of all, the daughter cells are in different layers, right? So this daughter cell is in layer 6, layer 5, layer 4, layer 2, none in layer 1, right? And what we know is that the daughter cell in layer 6 was the first one born. The daughter cell in layer 5 was the second, and we have the third and the fourth. kind of like what we see, what we saw in our cartoon over here. Okay, so we have other examples as well, where we have four daughter cells in this picture, and three daughter cells in this picture from the same radial glial cell. And we can see how the subsequent rounds of cell division produce neurons, daughter cells, that migrate further and further radially and occupy more and more superficial layers of the neocortex. Okay, another interesting feature to make note of is how the daughter cells are all kind of lined up radially in what looks like a column, right? You see that here and you see that consistently in all the cartoons that I've been showing. And I'll show this slide again just to emphasize how the daughter cell will use the radial fiber as a ladder or as a rope to find its way to the cortical plate. So even though it might might use the radial fiber to get out of the vz area and then it will use the radial fiber again to make it into the cortical plate okay so this is how you end up with the columnar organization of daughter cells in the developing neocortex and here in this picture, I hope you can see that you can even notice columns in this prenatal section of a 37-week -old cortex, right? So in about three more weeks, this child would be born. Here's layer one up here, right? And here are the other layers. And I hope you can see the radial columns that are present throughout the cortical thickness. The radial columns are a lot more difficult to identify in the adult brain since the cortex has expanded quite a bit and the neurons have spread out, and now you have dendrites and axons that have been growing. And again, related to the inside-out radial migration, we know that the earliest-born cells down here, right, are in the deep layers and the latest born cells are up here in layer two. So the young neurons are at the top and the older neurons are at the bottom according to their their birth date, right? All right, so let's kind of take a step back and look at the big picture of cortical development and the establishment of sulci and gyri. There's a lot more prenatal MRI that's being performed. So there's a lot of data out there about changes in size and shape and the developing cortex. You can see that about at around 18 weeks, the cortical plate is pretty thick, right? But the brain is still pretty smooth and there's not a lot of sulci and gyri. One of the first major convolutions that you see is the sylvian fissure here. And then of course there's the interhemispheric fissure at the midline, right? At about 26 weeks, we can see a couple of little bumps here. These are going to be the beginning of the central sulcus, precentral gyrus, and postcentral gyrus, right? And then at 30 weeks, you can see those bumps are a little bit more mature here, right? So you don't have to memorize the timing of these features, but what's important is that those biggest characteristic sulci and gyri that we teach in neuroanatomy lab are the ones that are developing first, right? And here at 30 weeks, we also have the cingulate gyrus, and here we have the calcarine fissure of the occipital lobe, right? So again, you don't need to memorize this, but what you can see is that these major landmarks are being formed as the neocortex is getting thicker, right? Thicker and thicker, and this is going to cause the cortex to begin to fold upon itself to form those sulci and gyri. Here is data from a study where they tried to make a kind of average time course of the folding and the formation of sulci and gyri. And in these images, we have frontal lobe over here, and we have occipital lobe back here, right? So beginning at about 26 weeks, you're really only seeing the central sulcus, right? You're seeing the sylvian fissure, and you would also see the interhemispheric fissure, which we can't see. And then you see the characteristics sulci and gyri appearing at these average times. And then at closest to birth, for example, 35 weeks shown in this study, you can see there's still a lot of sulci and gyri left to be formed in the frontal lobes, right? And there's really good evidence that the frontal lobes are among the latest parts of the neocortex to be developed, right? And again, like we saw before, central sulcus, one of the earliest characteristic features of the developing neocortex. all right so just like it's important to understand proliferation and cortical development it's also important to understand neuronal migration in cortical development because there are a broad range of neural placement disorders so disorders of uh neuronal migration where the neocortex does not form properly okay these are not again proliferation disorders like microcephaly or hemimegalencephaly. Instead, these are migration disorders that disrupt the organization of the neocortex, and we're going to talk about several flavors of them, okay, and build on what we already know from our discussion about radioglia and the migration of the daughter cells, right? So there's one type of neuronal placement disorder where you see nodules, you see heterotopic nodules in the ventricles. So here we have a gross specimen and we see the lateral ventricle right here. And I hope you can see these nodules that are lining the ventricular wall. and even in this MRI, I hope you can see all these nodules, right, which are heterotopic collections of neurons, right? So all these neurons in here belong in the neocortex, but they have not migrated properly, right? So periventricular nodular heterotopia, like we're seeing here, is an example of where newborn neurons, newborn daughter cells, fail to leave the ventricular zone and end up forming these nodules. For all of these kinds of malformations that we'll talk about, there is a growing list of genes that have now been identified for these migration disorders, right? And now that whole genome sequencing is more readily accessible, we're beginning to learn a lot more about the genetic mechanisms that cause these disorders. So one of the mutations that cause causes periventricular nodular heterotopia is filament A, okay, which is an actin binding protein. And these proteins are likely involved in, you know, movement and shape change related activities inside the cell during migration, right? And mutations in filament A cause periventricular heterotopia in humans as well as mice, right? So mice can have periventricular heterotopia as well. So here's an example over here of the normal architecture of the cortex in a mouse, right? And notice how, and here is the lateral ventricle in the mouse. But we can see in a mouse with mutation of filament A, we see these nodules right along the ventricle. And if we zoom in, we can see that these are cortical neurons. And again, in these mouse studies, if you use a marker of cortical neurons in the control mouse the normal mouse you see all the cortical neurons up here in the in the cortical plate but in the filament a knockout I hope you can see that you see some of those cortical neurons labeled as well as down here stuck near the lateral ventricle where where they don't belong right so this is again not a proliferation problem this is a migration problem and what we're talking about is again how our radial glial cell will divide and make a daughter cell and instead of leaving the ventricular zone it gets stuck. Stuck here with many other rounds of daughter cells forming nodules and importantly this kind of malformation is associated with cognitive disability and epilepsy. Let's move to another neuronal migration disorder called subcortical band heterotopia, also known as double cortex syndrome. So in this condition, instead of seeing nodules in the ventricles, what we see is a band of gray matter that's trapped in what would normally be the white matter. Okay, so I'm trying to outline here that extra band of gray matter that you see. Okay, so this is why it's called double cortex because we have this extra, you know, area of gray matter, right? So we have white matter in these dots that I'm drawing, gray matter another band of white matter and then gray matter right if we look at the histology of the of the let's look first look at the normal cortex we see with a cell body stain we can see the gray matter up here and then we see the white matter here right but notice in our affected patient with subcortical band heterotopia, we see gray matter up here, we see a little bit of white matter, then we have another collection of gray matter, and then more white matter here. This is where the term double cortex syndrome comes from. Okay, so the cells have migrated away from the ventricular zone surface, right? So this is not like periventricular nodular heterotopia. Instead, they've migrated a little further away, but now are stuck, right? And these cells otherwise should have migrated all the way up to the cortical plate, right? Patients with mutations in EML1, DCX, or LIS1 will exhibit subcortical band heterotopia. Note that all these genes are microtubule -associated genes, encoding for microtubule -associated proteins, right? And I think you've learned a little bit about microtubules and the importance of these proteins in cytoskeletal shape and the features of cells, especially neurons that have elaborate shape, right? And so again, based on our cartoon, if we use our cartoon as a tool to help us understand neuronal migration, what we think is happening here, we have our radial glial cell that is able to divide, right? And that daughter cell is able to leave the ventricular zone area, right? This is why we don't get the periventricular nodules, right? But something goes wrong when the daughter cell is in the SVZ and the intermediate zone, the intermediate zone and subventricular zone. I mentioned a while back that these areas are what become the developing cortical white matter. So something must go wrong, such as deficient EMX1 or DCX or LIS1 or microtubule function so that these cells can change their shape, become radial again, and then migrate up to the cortical plate, right? So again, they get stuck in here, right, which results in them being here. So, you know, the microtubules or cytoskeletal proteins are not working properly to allow these cells to migrate out of the intermediate zone. And again, like we saw with periventricular nodular heterotopia, patients affected with double cortex syndrome are going to have cognitive disabilities and epilepsy. We have talked about conditions where the neurons don't migrate enough and get stuck in the near the ventricle or the white matter. Now let's look at another condition where the neurons migrate too far and and don't end up in their appropriate layer. So remember that the normal cortex we have our six layers and layer one up here doesn't have a lot of neurons, right? Instead it has a lot of glia and axons. I want you to take a look at something that's called molecular layer heterotopia or layer one heterotopia here in these two images from human brains. Sometimes they're also called marginal zone heterotopia and basically what these are are collections of hundreds or thousands of neurons that have migrated too far into layer one. Notice how on either side of these areas, shown here or here, layer one is pretty clean, very few cells, right? But in this focal area, we have neurons that have migrated too far. And this is something that you see in patients with epilepsy and patients with dyslexia, particularly in regions like temporal lobe and frontal lobe areas. So this might tie to the speech and language processing that you see in some of these patients. And again, going back to our cartoon to describe what we think is happening with these malformations is that the neurons, so you have your radial glial cell, it divides, the daughter cell is able to leave the ventricular zone, right, is labeled to leave the intermediate zone. And it continues on its journey and begins to migrate into the cortical plate. And instead of stopping at its appropriate layer, right, the cell migrates too far into layer one, like you see here. Okay, so not a lot of information is known about the, you know, what causes these, this kind of heterotopia, but there is a lot of work doing, being done in animal models. Let me show you a little bit of data from work in animal models of molecular layer heterotopia that I think can still teach us a lot about what these malformations in humans. So over here, we have an example of staining for a molecule that's only found in layer four neurons called ROAR-B, right? Can you see how the staining is mostly restricted to this band here? All of this would be layer four in the mouse. I hope you can see how there are a lot of cells in this little malformation here that also express ROR B, right? So this is evidence that neurons that belong in layer layer four that express ROR B have migrated too far, right? They migrated too far and now they're in layer one where they don't belong. And there's another example I'll show here with staining for a molecule called CTGF, right? And CTGF is only found in layer six cortical neurons, but I hope you can see here that in that molecular layer heterotopia, you have some neurons that are expressing this gene. And this is evidence that these cells up here in the malformation belong long in layer six, but have migrated too far. Okay. And so we think that this is likely also true of these heterotopia in humans, which is that they're a collection of neurons from all different layers that are in layer one, forming this abnormal, abnormal circuit that might contribute to some of the functional deficits that you see in people with epilepsy or dyslexia, where these malformations have been found, right? And hopefully someday soon we'll see some anatomical studies in humans where we'll be able to confirm that this type of anatomical change is also present. All right. And the last type of neuronal migration disorder that I want to talk about that's very global, a big, pretty huge deficit It is called lisencephaly that maybe you've been exposed to before in a previous lecture. Lisencephaly is a generic, lisencephaly means smooth brain and it's basically a generic term where you have a reduction or complete loss of the sulcine gyri of the neocortex. So there's a continuation of lisencephaly. There is agyria, which means no gyri, or pachygyria, which is characterized by few or large and broad gyri, so a kind of incomplete lisencephaly. So here is an example of pachygyria, right, with large, broad sulci and gyri. And you can see in these other examples how smooth the cortical surface looks compared to the normal brain full of sulky and gyri, right? There are lots of genes that cause lisencephaly and that list is growing. One of the genes involved in lisencephaly is called, where's my cursor, is relin, although So only 1% of patients with realin mutations have listencephaly. I wanted to mention it because it's one of the genes whose function during cortical development is beginning to be more and more understood. So it turns out that realin is expressed and released by the Cajal-Retzia cells that we talked about a long time ago at the very beginning of this lecture when we were looking at the developing neocortex in the human, right? So remember that we have these Cajal-Retzia cells in the marginal zone or layer one, right? They're not in the neural epithelial zone and they're above the cortical plate, right? Right? So, the Cajal-Retzi cells are a unique type of cell in the developing cortex. They're not born from radial glia. They're born in a separate part of the developing brain and they migrate up to layer one. So again, up here, we have our marginal zone and we have our cortical plate. And notice how we have our inside-out pattern of neuronal migration. So cell division round 1, 2, 3, 4 are being stacked upon each other, right? And what we know, like I was mentioning, is that our Cajal -Retzia cells express and release Relin. And And they think that Relin is a molecular cue that helps to keep the neuronal migration nice and tidy, right? And in this cartoon here, what's being drawn is how the Cajal Ritzia cell no longer expresses is realin, right? And now how our daughter cells are all jumbled in the wrong layers, spread throughout the different cortical lamina, right? And so what you see in this encephaly is not only do you see a loss of sulci and gyri, but when you look at the histology, you see a kind of a loss loss of lamination and a smearing of cortical neurons throughout the different cortical layers. Right? So again, if you have mutations in realin, you're disrupting that signaling, the neurons are not migrating to the right place. And so the cortex is not growing properly to fold properly, like you would see. So there is some really nice animal studies looking at realin mutations. And I'll show you first in the normal mouse, using different markers for different layers and using different colors, you can see how the cortical layers have cell types organized horizontally, right? And each color is a different gene that's expressed by the different cell types. And you see there's nice orderly layers. But in a mouse with mutation of relin, I hope you can appreciate how there's basically dislamination and all the different neurons are spread throughout the cortex. So lamination is basically lost. And again, just like in the human, when you have mutations of relin, for example, here there's a strain of sheep. I forget where these sheep are found. I think in South America that have a spontaneous mutation of relin, what you see is that compared to the normal sheep brain that has a nice, you know, sulci and gyri, the mutant sheep that express relin have a form of lysencephaly, right? So you can see that here in the coronal sections where we have the normal sheep with all its sulci and gyri versus the relin mutant sheep that basically has lisencephaly. So again, I mentioned these aspects so that we can try to understand how the human phenotype, the human brain malformation that we observe, is created at the molecular and cellular level. So this takes us to the end of our lecture. I want to remind all of you about our radial glia and how they give rise to the newborn neurons that migrate in an inside-out pattern of migration to help form the six layers of the neocortex. The radial fibers contact the peel surface and and form a substrate kind of like a ladder or a rope for neurons to migrate but they're also important molecular cues in the developing neocortex like relin from the Cajal Ritzia cells And, of course, there are intracellular machinery, intracellular proteins like those microtubule proteins that, when perturbed, can cause heterotopia where neurons don't migrate enough. right um so all in all um whenever neuron whenever neuronal placement is altered you're going to have deficits in lamination just like when neuronal production is altered you're going to have deficits in in brain size right And so please reach out if you have any questions and feedback is welcome.