Hi, everyone, and welcome. It's Dr. Karen Poole, and I'm here at the Jonesboro campus. And today, we're going to be talking about neuroembryology. So I know that embryology, famously, is not the favorite subject of a lot of medical students, and that's OK. But today's lecture, I think, is really going to lay out the overall structure of the nervous system and how that works in adults. And I think that's going to be helpful. The other main thing we're going to talk about here is when certain steps in the development don't go the way we expect and the congenital disorders that can arise from that. And congenital disorders in the nervous system are second only to heart defects in terms of frequency. So these are things that are going to be important clinically. And on that note, just so you're aware, we are going to be talking about some pretty severe congenital defects with fetuses and neonates. I haven't put a lot of like graphic images in here or anything, but we are going to talk about things like anencephaly, just so you're aware. Okay, so our session objectives here, we're going to talk about the timing and the sequence of events in the neural tube formation in a human embryo. We're going to talk about cellular organization of the neural tube and the neural crust derivatives. At the end of this, you should be able to compare and contrast development of the spinal cord with that of the brain and correlate the major brain developmental landmarks, that is to say different segments of the brain that we call vesicles with the anatomy of the human brain at birth. And then use all of that to kind of think about what are these most common neuroanatomical malformations at birth. So we're going to start off with a quick review of gastrulation. Okay, remember the gastrulation is this step within embryonic development in which the three different germ layers are formed. So this is when we're forming ectoderm versus mesoderm versus endoderm. And that happens with sort of the, what will become ectoderms or what will become, you know, endoderm and mesoderm folding in from the ectoderm along this primitive node and primitive streak. So here we're in like a dorsal view of the embryo and here we're in a sagittal cut through it. So we have the ectoderm here in blue. We have that primitive pit there where cells are starting to come inward that will become the mesoderm that's shown here in this sort of pink color. And part of that mesoderm will become the notochord here in black. And then you have the yolk *** down here in yellow, which will become endoderm. The details of that aren't important here. Just remember, we have those three germ layers, ectoderm, mesoderm, endoderm. Something else I do want to note in this first slide is I'll have days denoted, like number of days into development that certain events happen. Note that I'm following the typical embryological convention here of counting from fertilization, which is offset about two weeks from how we clinically define pregnancy, which starts from the last menstrual cycle. And so if I say something happens at 21 days of development, that's three weeks into development three weeks after fertilization, but that's about five weeks into clinically defined pregnancy. So just FYI if you're thinking about the timing of these things. So now we're looking at the dorsal view of the embryo. So this edge here is the cut edge of the amniotic ***. All right. And here we see in blue this thickening neural plate. So that starts to form as the notochord and the paraxial mesenchyme that is on either side of that notochord, as those start to develop, they induce the overlying ectoderm to thicken into the neural plate. And that starts at the rostral end, or we also call that the cranial end. All right, this is what will become the head. So it starts at the head end of the embryo, and it's going to move caudally. And it involves a whole bunch of signaling molecules, Wnts, sonic hedgehog, bone morphogenic proteins, all right? These are all common signaling molecules we see in embryology. I don't care if you can tell me exactly which ones are involved here, all right? As neuralation continues, the midline of that neural plate starts to fold in on itself, all right? So if we have this sort of flat plate here it starts to indent like this and that's what we're seeing in this center section and so that's that indentation is what we call the neural groove and on either side of it is a neural crest as those start those pieces start to rise up more dorsally and i also want to note here that there's still a primitive streak on this embryo. So gastrulation is still happening while nurgulation begins. So typically, if we're sequencing these things, we'd say gastrulation happens and then nurgulation happens, but there is overlap between the two. And then as we continue with nurgulation, all right here that starts really in the center of the embryo and then proceeds both caudally and cranially but here if we're looking at cuts through a couple different segments here's the cut for line b so here we have that ectodermin blue and it's folding in so we have our neural groove here and the neural crest up here all right so it's folding it on itself it's starting to form this tube-like structure that will become the neural tube. And at line C here, that process has completed. So we do have this closed off separated neural tube, and that is separate from the overlying ectoderm. So that neural tube is what's going to form the spinal cord and the brain, and the overlying ectoderm will form skin, musculature, and parts of the vertebrae or skull. Although in this case, in the middle of the embryo, it'll be vertebrae. And this is just another view of that same process, right? So early on, we have this sort of thickened area. And I wanted to show this diagram because it shows that neural plate nicely. You can see out here, the ectoderm are these fairly small kind of cuboidal cells. And here, this is the neural plate itself, where those cells are more columnar. They've thickened. And that's induced by that notochord and paraxial mesoderm along here. so then that neural crest comes up wraps and kind of starts to cover over that neural groove we get the neural tube over here and here we're also showing that in between that surface ectoderm and the neural tube we have a set of cells that sort of become unattached in that process They don't stick to the neural tube, and they don't stick to that surface ectoderm. They become these sort of free-floating neural crest cells, and those migrate to a lot of different places in the body, and we'll cover those in some later slides. So as neurulation continues, here we're looking at a dorsal view of the embryo, and so here the neural tube has mostly closed, but there's still what we call a posterior or caudal neural pore. Alright, so we have an opening at the end of the tube still. And at the anterior end, we have an anterior or a rostral neural pore. And here we're looking at it in lateral view. And you can see this is happening, right, 23 to 25 days into development. And here the neural tube is closed off, completely separated from that overlying ectoderm. That should be about 28 days or four weeks into development, so that's about six weeks of pregnancy. And then putting that all together in a slightly more cartoon form, we have here in a slice through the embryo that notochord with overlying ectoderm that starts to induce the neural plate to grow. so you have this thickened area of the ectoderm that then starts to fold in forming that neural groove as well as the neural crest and we can see that in the dorsal view up here you've got your neural groove starting and the neural folds along the edge and then you have that neural tube starting to form the neural crust cells that separate and lie in this space between the neural tube and the neural crust cells. And here you've got your anterior or rostral or cranial neuropore, all right, and the posterior or caudal neuropore. So here's our first of several different congenital disorders. And in this case, we're looking at a failure of that caudal neuropore to close. And that results in what we call spina bifida. And we talked about this all the way back in the very first anatomy lab, if you remember, where we talked, we were talking about the structure of vertebrae. And you have here in this cross section, your vertebral body. And then the pedicles are along the side here. And here is the lamina. All right. And here it's referring to it is the the neural arch all right so if you think of the whole thing together as the neural arch it's incomplete in this case and that's because right that's forming from the ectoderm that overlies the neural tube and if the if that caudal neural port doesn't completely close then the overlying ectoderm doesn't develop in the way that it should so a is showing uh the the most mild form of spina bifida called spina bifida occulta. You can see that on the surface the skin is in place the way it should be. There is sometimes, because of a lack of migration of those neural crest cells, you can get sort of a tuft of dark colored hair there, but not always. And so this is called occulta because we often don't even know about it or don't see it. And it's found incidentally when the patient has scans done for some other reason. All right. So this is a fairly mild form. If we go to B, this is called a meningocele or meningocele, right? Here, the meninges are bulging out. We're lacking those laminae or the vertebral arch entirely. And in this case, right, we basically have a cyst forming, pushing out through the skin. The spinal cord itself is still where it should be. There are generally no neural deficits with this, but you do probably want to surgically repair that so that there's not a bulge sticking out and that *** of CSF, all right, because there's potential for leakage and problems if that remains in place. Then we come to meningomyelocele, which is also called myelomeningocele, all right, either either sequence works, but the point is that we actually have the spinal cord out in that membranous ***. And so here we have these kind of displaced lengthened roots of the spinal nerves, and so there can be some neurological complications in this case. The severity will depend on how high or low on the spinal cord this occurs. And then finally in the most severe case we have myeloscesis in which the spinal cord itself is open. Like that spinal cord doesn't even close. The neural tube that would lead to the spinal cord doesn't close at all. And so this will have some neural deficits. Obviously you've got just neural tissue lying on the surface, you've got to surgically do something about that and cover that over. So this is a complex sort of problem. Now, at the other end, if we look at a failure of the rostral neuropore to close, and again, going from sort of least severe to most, these collectively are referred to encephalocele. Though technically, this first thing isn't an encephalocele. We also call this meningocel, all right? So in this case, again, you have an opening in the bones of the skull, most commonly in the occipital bone, and you have the dura and arachnoid matter coming out here, and this fluid CSF -filled subarachnoid space that's emerging from the skull, all right? So that's also a meningocel, because it's the meninges coming out, forming this cyst-like structure. If the brain herniates out into that space, then we call it a meningoencephalocele. So now we're truly into the encephaloceles. This is brain tissue coming outside of the true cranial cavity. And again, this is because those skull bones overlying the brain didn't fully close. And then a variation on that, if part of the ventricle comes out into that space, We would call it a meningohydroencephalocele because you also have some of this CSF-filled ventricle inside of the brain tissue, inside of the, you know, also CSF out here. So you've got multiple layers of CSF, brain tissue, CSF. and the most uh severe of these rostral neuroporeclosures this is the equivalent of myeloschisis when we were talking about spinobifida this is just a complete failure of the brain to form all right so that's called anencephaly also called miroencephaly so the brain itself does not form the overlying bones of the skull don't ever get induced to form because the brain doesn't form properly and and in this situation there's really there's really not much to do for that fetus or infant because they don't have enough brain to keep them alive. So going back to that neural tube formation, we already mentioned those neural crest cells. Okay, so once we've got that neural tube forming and the neural crest cells are basically going to come from the very edge of that neural plate that formed. All right, so we've got border of the neural plate. These will become the neural crest cells. These are the cells that don't get attached either to the neural tube or to the overlying skin. And those will then migrate to form a lot of different structures, both of the nervous system and other systems. So these are important in that craniofacial skeleton. and as part of that you have the teeth right because the maxilla and mandible are part of that so it makes sense these are also contributing to teeth. Cranial ganglia here means some of the ganglia of the cranial nerves. It also contributes to thyroid cells continuing inferiorly. These neural crest cells contribute to the enteric ganglia and smooth muscle cells, as well as parts of the heart and the cardiac septa. They contribute to, or they really form, right, the dorsal root ganglia all throughout the spinal cord alongside of it. They're forming dorsal root ganglia as well as the sympathetic ganglia. So by that we mean the paravertebral ganglia, as well as that celiac, superior mesenteric, and inferior mesenteric ganglion. And they also contribute to the adrenal medulla. And then continuing in that sacral level, same thing, enteric and sympathetic ganglia. All right. And this is just a different view of that same idea, right? There's that closure of the neural tube. There's those neural crest cells splitting off and migrating to various parts of the body. so a couple other things that weren't on that previous slide these are going to contribute to the arachnoid and pia matter as well as schwann cells those those supporting cells within the neural system they also form melanocytes that give skin and eyes and hair pigment coloring. And we mentioned the facial bones, the teeth, parts of the larynx and tracheal cartilage and parts of the heart. So problems with neural crest cells can manifest in a lot of different ways that we're not going to get into here. But just know that very often, you know, you can see these connections between some issues with potentially the brain, but really like the craniofacial skeleton, the larynx, and the heart, because those are all being derived from neural crest cells. Not the entire heart, right, but some of the septum and valves of the heart. So once we've got this neural tube, it divides into several layers, all right? So you have the neural canal on the inside of it with a ventricular layer here, then a mantle layer, and a marginal layer. That neural canal is going to become the ventricles of the brain and the central canal of the spinal cord. The ventricular layer will become a thin layer of what we call ependymal or glial cells that that are just lining the ventricles and central canal, the mantle layer becomes gray matter, and the marginal layer becomes white matter. And then, in addition to that sort of concentric layering within the tube, we have a gradient that forms between the dorsal portions of the neural tube and the ventral portions. And again, I don't care that you can tell me the specific signaling molecules involved here, but we have this gradient that occurs because sonic hedgehog proteins are produced in the notochord on the ventral side of the neural tube, and bone morphogenic proteins are produced in the ectoderm that will become the skin overlying the neural tube. And the gradient between those that's sort of shown here, right, grading from this green into the blue, that is what creates this differentiation between the dorsal portion of the neural tube that will be involved in sensory neurons and the ventral portion that will give rise to the motor neurons. And if we look at that in more detail here, here we have the neural canal and this is our very basic sort of setup. Here we start to see what's called a basal plate and an alar plate. And those two are separated by the sulcus limitons, right? So that's this slight divot within the central canal that delineates this more dorsal region from the more ventral region all right and the basal and alar plates are forming within that within that mantle layer sorry that we saw here so there's mantle layer, and that's going to give rise to the basal and alar plates. And then those become what we are more familiar with as the ventral horn down here and the dorsal horn within the spinal cord. And if we break that down even a little further, we can see that the sensory cell bodies, Remember, those exist out here in the dorsal root ganglion, the cell bodies. And so those come from the neural crest cells. But the axons will grow into and connect into the alar plate. Whereas for the motor neurons, they actually arise from the central nervous system, and they grow within that basal plate that becomes the ventral horn of the spinal cord. So one last point about the spinal cord is that in an early embryo, the spinal cord is the same length as the vertebral column. But the vertebrae and the somites around them, so all the bone and muscle tissue, grows at a much faster rate than this neural tissue. And the spinal cord is pretty firmly attached to the brain at its cranial end. so that means that it is the caudal end of the spinal cord that it's sort of free hanging here that ends up moving relative to the vertebrae so by 24 weeks of development the end of the spinal cord the the conus medullaris which is labeled here as the medullary cone is at about s1 level by the time of birth, it's about at L3. And then in adulthood, it ends about between L1 and L2. So a couple of clinical notes for that. You know, if we're trying to do any kind of lumbar puncture, epidural things, you're still generally safe at that L4 to L5 level, even in an infant. All right, But that is why we tend to want to be that low, is just to make sure in practice that we're never going to risk hitting the spinal cord itself. And the other thing here is you can see, for example, this S1 level spinal nerve is a pretty reasonable length and similar to all the other spinal nerves at this stage. But as that spinal cord retracts superiorly through the vertebral canal, these nerve roots have to get longer to compensate. And that's what ultimately produces that cauda equina, that bundle of these really long spinal nerves on their way to get down to the level where they actually exit the vertebrae. Something else to be aware of here is that because of all this and this typical movement of the spinal cord, there can be situations where either independently or because of some form of spina bifida, where the spinal cord is still attached to the surrounding tissue. It hasn't fully separated. And in that case, then instead of this smooth movement of the spinal cord superiorly, you end up with that spinal cord being stuck at a certain point. And so then all the neural tissue in between has to stretch along with the growth of the surrounding tissues. And that can produce some neurological problems and is referred to as tethered cord syndrome. So that's all I have for this sort of early portion of embryology and the spinal cord. We're going to be back in another segment with the development of the brain. Hello, everyone, and welcome back for part two of our lecture on the overview of neuroembryology. And here we're going to focus on the development of the brain. so we've already discussed the formation of the neural tube and the spinal cord and the brain like the spinal cord develops from that neural tube it just grows a lot more than in the spinal cord now here we're looking at a sagittal section through an embryo at about 28 days of development So here's that spinal cord in blue. And then here you can see the *********** of the brain. We call this region rostral versus caudal back here. Within the spinal cord, we could say caudal this way and then cranial. But cranial means towards the head. So once we're in the head, we use the term rostral instead. Because saying towards the head wouldn't make any sense. So we have three primary vesicles within the brain, that's the forebrain, the midbrain, and the hindbrain. And by vesicle here, we just mean like a swelling, an *********** of that neural tube. And so we have those three primary vesicles, and they also have more sort of formal names than forebrain, midbrain, and hindbrain. and those are prosencephalon for the forebrain, mesencephalon for the midbrain, and rhombencephalon for the hindbrain. Now, those three primary vesicles then grow and divide into five secondary vesicles. So the forebrain, or prosencephalon, gives rise to the telencephalon and the diencephalon. The telencephalon or telencephalon, either way, all right, the telencephalon divides into the left and the right cerebral hemispheres and this cavity within it becomes the lateral ventricles. The diencephalon gives rise to the thalamus, the hypothalamus, the optic nerves and really the eye forms as an outgrowth of it and the space that cavity inside becomes the third ventricle. Also it took me an embarrassingly long time to realize this so I'm just going to tell you all. The lateral ventricles are ventricles one and two because there's a left and a right. That's why the third ventricle is the third. The midbrain, the mesencephalon or mesencephalon remains the mesencephalon and the midbrain. That's all it's called. It doesn't divide, so that one's easy, and the space within it is called the aqueduct or the cerebral aqueduct. The hindbrain or rhombencephalon divides into the metencephalon and the myelencephalon. The metencephalon becomes the pons and the cerebellum. So you always want to associate the pons and the cerebellum with each other. They're forming from the same level of the brain. And then the myelencephalon becomes the medulla. and this the cavity within all of those leads to the fourth ventricle so i want to make a note here about sort of the folding of the brain as it develops and how that relates to the ways we refer to directions in the brain because it is a little odd all right so early on this is actually initially at some point pretty much straight but rostral is always going to be this direction within the brain, and caudal is this direction towards the spinal cord. But as the brain grows and sort of folds over itself, as we see here by six weeks, rostral becomes almost 90 degrees to caudal, but we keep referring to these directions, even in adult anatomy in the brain. So within the brain stem, caudal is more or less in an adult inferior and rostral is more or less superior. But then as we move into the diencephalon and telencephalon, then rostral really means more like anterior anatomically and caudal is more posterior. So there's this bend in the brain that makes that directionality a little bit confusing so I just wanted to address that here. And then here are the adult derivatives of the forebrain, midbrain, and hindbrain and their different components with the added information of the cranial nerves associated with each here. All right, so the olfactory nerve comes from the telencephalon, the optic nerve, as I mentioned, the optic nerve and sort of the outgrowth of that, which is the eye, comes from the diencephalon. The midbrain or mesencephalon has the oculomotor and trochlear nerves. And then here, the graph isn't exactly divided, but the pons gives rise to the next four cranial nerves. So that's 5, 6, 7, and 8. So we should put a line across here. That all goes with the metencephalon, or pons. And then coming from the medulla, we have the last four cranial nerves, 9, 10, 11, and 12. This table actually doesn't list 11 because it's the spinal accessory nerve, most of its nucleus really is down in the spinal cord, so it doesn't list it here with the medulla, but it is along there. So our last four are medulla. So we have a congenital disorder associated with sort of this step in the process, and that division of the prosencephalon down the midline. So really it's the lateralization of both the telencephalon and diencephalon that are involved here. And holoprosencephaly means one prosencephalon or a whole prosencephalon, so it's not divided along the midlines. This means there are not separate left and right cerebral hemispheres, and there are not separate lateral ventricles. They are in communication with each other, typically. So if we look at that in MRI form, here is a T2 MRI from a two -year-old girl, and in T2 MRIs, CSF is going to show up really bright. All right, so this bright area here are the two lateral ventricles, which are one large ventricle in this case. They are communicating across that midline, so there would be probably at least somewhat a lack of a corpus callosum in this situation. And here you can see there's a bit of a longitudinal fissure, that division between the left and the right cerebral hemispheres in this case, or sorry, posteriorly, there's a bit of a longitudinal fissure, but anteriorly there is not. So this would be considered a more mild case, all right, and there's still definitely some neurological problems associated with that. There can be seizures, motor impairments, hydrocephalus, which we'll talk about later, which is sort of impaired flow of cerebrospinal fluid. Now there can be hormone dysregulation because the hypothalamus can be affected. So even milder cases are going to have a lot of neurological problems. More severe cases of this, though, lead to basically because you don't have lateralization and a left and right division of those cerebral hemispheres, then you also don't really get lateralization of the facial features that overlie them. So you can have cyclopia, like a single midline eye instead of two eyes, this sort of tube-like or proboscis-like nose that's with a single nostril, problems with the lips and palate not forming properly. So there's a lot of facial abnormalities that happen with this. And, you know, severe cases of holoprosencephaly are likely to be stillborn, and they have a high mortality within the first month and year of life. All right, so now we're going to kind of go through each level of that brainstem and talk about the distinctions there, but I just want to review the spinal cord in relation to it. So up here we have the early brainstem versus the early spinal cord, and we've already seen similar diagrams to this, right, where we have that alar plate and the basal plate, and they're divided by that sulcus limitans all right we didn't talk about as much the floor plate and the roof plate here but that's just these this layer of ependymol or neuroepithelial cells lining that central canal and that roof plate is going to play a major role in the the formation of the brain stem. Now in the early brain stem it's pretty similar except that this central area that will become the ventricles is much larger than what becomes the central canal in the spinal cord. And we still have an alar plate which will give rise to sensory regions and a basal plate that will give rise to motor regions. But these arrows sort of indicate the growth that's going to happen here. And here in the midbrain, as one example, and this is probably the most similar region to the spinal cord, even though there's a bunch of extra stuff happening, we still have this sensory region that is more dorsal and this motor region that is more ventral. now if we look at the myelencephalon specifically here and here we're looking at a dorsal view and we sort of cut through what will become the fourth ventricle here which is the roof plate and we're looking at a dorsal view the important thing here are these cross sections and you can And you can see that roof plate has grown dramatically in this region. So that we end up with alar plates that are more lateral and basal plates that are more medial. So instead of this dorsal ventral divide, we actually have a sort of lateral to medial divide because we've gone from a tube like this to something that's more open with a roof plate connecting my fingertips here. all right so our sensory regions have moved out to the sides and the motor regions remain more or less where they were but now that seems more more medial than ventral as compared to where the sensory regions are and we can break that down into where the visceral afferents are special visceral afferent general visceral afferent all of that okay and I'm not going to go through each of those, but they're on the diagram for you. And here, this is very similar to what we just looked at, but I did want to contrast the upper or rostral portion of the medulla here with the lower or caudal portion. So in the lower portion of the medulla, it looks a lot more like the spinal cord, all right? It doesn't really have like those dorsal and ventral horns, so it's not exactly the same but we do have more or less a central canal here and then sensory areas sensory nuclei that are more dorsal and down here the pyramids are they're not motor nerve or they're not motor neuron bodies but they are axons for the motor system coming from the cortex ultimately and then down to the spinal cord. All right, so those pyramids are a motor region. And so we have that sensory dorsal versus motor ventral dichotomy here. Whereas in the rostral portion of the medulla, those sensory regions have moved out laterally, or if you like alliteration, they are to the side. So sensory side, motor, medial here. moving into the metencephalon and there's a i know there's a lot going on in these diagrams but here we're looking at a lateral view of the whole brain here's our forebrain up here midbrain here's our developing metencephalon and in sort of a sagittal section through there you can see that part of that is the cerebellum part of that is the pons and then what will become the fourth ventricle is in between. And then here we're looking at a cross -section through there and there we can see once again we've got this fourth ventricle forming that roof plate or a pendimal roof forming and this region with the yellow arrow going to it is what we call the rhombic lip and that's what's going to give rise to specifically the vermis of the cerebellum, and this whole sort of dark blue region will give rise to cerebellum. So that's ultimately going to sort of wrap back around to this region behind that fourth ventricle. And then here, this is a similar view to this, just later in development, where we can see that cerebellum has grown dramatically. So if that doesn't happen, specifically the vermis of the cerebellum grows from that rhombic lip. And sometimes that doesn't happen properly. Again, it's very multifactorial. It can happen for all kinds of different reasons. but if that happens then you end up with either agenesis or hypoplasia of the cerebellar vermis and that's indicated here in the with the yellow arrow on this normal MRI it's this whole region here this is all cerebellum and you can see here this is what the fourth ventricle should look like right you You get this nice sort of triangular shape here. But over here, because the vermis did not develop, you have this huge area of cerebrospinal fluid here that is this sort of large cystic region of the fourth ventricle. And we only have a very small part of that cerebellar vermis, and often what happens is that ends up sort of pushing upwards and this ventricular system doesn't communicate that well. So you can often get hydrocephalus associated with Dandy -Walker syndrome. Now the primary problem with Dandy-Walker is because that cerebellar vermis doesn't develop, you have ataxia. So problems with coordination and particularly an unsteady gait. And as I said, but it can often be associated with hydrocephalus, which we'll cover in a later slide. Moving up to the mesencephalon, here, again, we're looking at that lateral view of the brain, forebrain up here, we're looking at a section through the midbrain. And once again, we have that alar and basal plate, giving rise to various portions of the midbrain. and then as we move here into the 11th week of development as that telencephalon increases in size here we've got a couple different sections through here so we're looking at the inferior midbrain here and the more superior portion here we have the superior colliculus and the inferior colliculus and those are somewhat sensory in nature right and you can see those basically have have come off from that alar plate and then down here depending on the level you have either the trochlear nucleus or the oculomotor nucleus and those are motor so once again we have that sensory versus motor dichotomy and then the aqueduct the cerebral aqueduct is right in the center of that. So now we're going to talk about the overall growth of both the cerebrum and the cerebellum. So remember this division here if we're looking at the general tube, the general neural tube structure, you have this ventricular layer lining the neural canal, a mantle layer that becomes gray matter, and a marginal layer that becomes white matter. All right, and that's reflected up here again. Here they're calling the ventricular layer the neuroepithelial layer and then mantle and then marginal. And in the spinal cord things stay that way, all right? So you end up with gray matter surrounded by white matter tracts, surrounded by pia matter. In the cerebrum and cerebellum though, these neuroblasts that will ultimately give rise to neurons, they start to migrate outwards. All right, so here we have the cerebellar view, and we have these migrating neuroblasts coming out here, forming these different layers of the cerebellar cortex. And then down here, we have the cerebrum. So again, you have migrating neuroblasts coming out here and forming this primordial cortex. So the key thing here is that this is how we end up with gray matter on the external surface of the cerebrum and the cerebellum whereas in the spinal cord it's simple uh gray matter surrounded by white matter tracts here we have migration of neuroblasts that go to the outside and carry gray matter out there more more towards the exterior and I won't get into all the different layers but that's essentially how those layers are formed all right so here we're looking at neocortex in the parietal in blue and frontal lobes in pink all right and that's neocortex and then remember that there's also allocortex or paleocortex which is simpler. It's only three layers as opposed to six, and that's going to be found on more the ventral sides of the cerebrum, the olfactory regions, and the hippocampus. So fetal development is mostly just a lot of that happening, right? You have those neuroblasts migrating and producing neurons and increasing the size of the cerebrum. So the cerebrum starts off fairly smooth but those gyri and sulci develop through the fetal period and as the cerebral hemispheres grow they cover the diencephalon. So here you can still see diencephalon a bit and then it's covered by week 26 here by the occipital lobe. And as we continue, the insular cortex is still visible externally, or laterally, I guess we could say, for quite some time. It's still visible here at week 30. But by week 38, sort of the end of fetal development, that is covered over by the temporal lobe. And you can see these gyri and sulci continuing to develop. so if that fails to occur or or or occurs slowly we call that microcephaly so microcephaly is just a reduction in that neurogenesis so hypoplasia of the cerebral hemispheres and the overlying cranial bones, because the brain essentially forces those bones to grow to accommodate the brain. And this, like many other things we're looking at here, has multiple causes. It can be genetic. It can be due to infection during pregnancy, exposure to alcohol, exposure to radiation. So this is a multifaceted thing. Lots of things can cause it. And it will have varying degrees of neurological issues depending on the extent. So I want to wrap up by talking about the development of the ventricles, which we've already touched on here, but I've just got a few images to really pad that out, all right? So here we're looking at a schematic view where we see the telencephalon dividing into the cerebral hemispheres and inside of that there are these two lateral ventricles and they have a huge amount of choroid plexus that's the cells that produce cerebrospinal fluid all right and they will initially are in communication with each other but as the cerebral hemispheres divide they'll be cut off from each other but each will still communicate with the third ventricle between the parts of the diencephalon and that then communicates with the aqueduct that goes through the midbrain which connects to the fourth ventricle in the hindbrain or rhombencephalon and the fourth ventricle then has openings into the subarachnoid space and so that's how all of this cerebrospinal fluid which is produced in these various choroid plexuses flows through the ventricular system and then from the fourth ventricle out into the subarachnoid space outside of the brain, where it then gets reabsorbed through the arachnoid granules into the venous system. And there is also a connection from that fourth ventricle into the central canal of the spinal cord. And then here, it's kind of just a rehash of that, right? you have your third ventricle in the diencephalon and then here in sectional view and that connects to each lateral ventricle as that roof of the third ventricle sort of divides the two lateral ventricles from each other and each lateral ventricle is connected to the third ventricle via the interventricular foramen also called the foramen of munro then here we're looking at sections at two different points in development through here so basically a coronal section through the brain and here you can see each lateral ventricle and they're now being divided from each other here by that ependimal roof of the third ventricle and here you can see that interventricular foramen and the thalamus on either side of the third ventricle and then by here you can see sort of that full division now there are still interventricular foramina that will connect the lateral to the third ventricles but they've gotten smaller at this point they're just a small foramina and you can only see through a particular slice and so here's sort of our general setup in the end and you can see that there's choroid plexus growing into each of the ventricles each lateral ventricle and the third ventricle all have choroid plexus and so does the fourth ventricle and that lateral ventricle grows along with the cerebrum so it's the white space here inside the cerebrum and as the cerebral hemispheres grow that lateral ventricle sort of grows different horns here. So we have that temporal horn going out into the temporal lobe, and then lastly the occipital horn going out into the occipital lobe develops. So here's our final setup of the ventricles sort of ghosted within the brain here. So this is all lateral ventricle and the occipital horn back here. There's that interventricular foramen connecting to the third ventricle here, wrapping around the interthalamic adhesion, which is that little circle. Then CSF will flow through the aqueduct in the midbrain down to the fourth ventricle in the hindbrain and from the fourth ventricle either into the central canal of the spinal cord or exiting through various openings into the subarachnoid space, which will then wrap around the brain. So our last disorder is hydrocephalus, and that is, and I mean you'll see that come up in a lot of contexts in medicine, congenital hydrocephalus is typically what we call non-communicating. So it just means that there's a blockage somewhere in the ventricular system, and cerebrospinal fluid cannot do what I just described, and flow from the lateral to the third ventricle through the aqueduct, into the fourth ventricle, and then into the subarachnoid space. So if cerebrospinal fluid can't drain properly, it builds up within those ventricles, and those push outward on the brain, and the brain pushes outward on the skull, and everything gets sort of enlarged here. So signs of this include large head size, and particularly also you'll see bulging veins, and remember that in infants, the bones of the calvarium are not all sutured together, and there are membranous portions there called fontanelles, and so those fontanelles will bulge outward. And in terms of symptoms, right, general sort of irritability, drowsiness, vomiting seizures, that kind of thing is what you're going to see with hydrocephalus. So summing it all up, remember that the nervous system develops from ectoderm, and the process of forming the neural tube is called neurulation. Neural crest cells then migrate from the neural tube to form parts of the peripheral nervous system as well as other structures. Once that neural tube is formed, it's divided into basal plates and alar plates. The basal plates are associated with motor regions and the alar plates with sensory regions. The final configuration differs a bit between the spinal cord and the brain stem, so look at those differences to think about the differentiation between motor regions and sensory regions. And then finally, the brain is formed by a series of vesicles, each of which is sort of an inflated area of the tube, and each vesicle gives rise to a portion of the brain and a portion of the ventricular system. And finally, as a summary slide, I have all the disorders that are listed in this lecture, and the embryonic structure that is affected, and sort of general description of the result of that embryonic structure not developing properly. I have not listed all the symptoms associated with each of these. That might be a good exercise for you to do. But that's all that I have for you today, so I hope that you've enjoyed this lecture, but if you haven't, either way, I appreciate feedback, and I wish you happy studying.