Hello everyone, this is Isaac Kurtzer, the Department of Biomedical Science at the Old Westbury campus. This lecture concerns supraspinal motor systems, cerebral cortex, and brainstem. It's the first of three. The next will be basal ganglia and cerebellum, and taken together, they'll provide a good introduction to a complex issue, which I know is close at heart, which is how is it that you are able to move your body? The session objectives for this lecture include understanding the origin and destination of descending tracts from the cerebral cortex and brainstem, for which there are quite a few. I will also contrast the different and complementary organizations of these systems and their overall function. And finally, we address how damaging the different systems will lead to different patterns of motor dysfunction. Let's go. A key distinction we must make is between lower motor neurons and upper motor neurons. Lower motor neurons are those that will innervate skeletal muscle. That means there'll be a neuromuscular junction, and they will release acetylcholine onto a target muscle. The cell bodies for these loader motor neurons are found within the CNS. They will have an axon that will exit the CNS and then ultimately terminate at the neuromuscular junction. When that axon is within the CNS, it is called a tract. When the axon is outside the CNS, i.e. when it's in the PNS, it's called a nerve. and external nerves always project ipsilaterally. Internal tracks for the low motor neurons almost always are ipsilateral. They do decussate, but it's quite rare. Now turning to upper motor neurons, these provide input to lower motor neurons. They have cell bodies in the cerebral cortex and the brainstem. So they will be projecting to those lower motor neurons in the brainstem and the spinal cord, not directly to muscle. They will not have a nerve. They will only have tracts. And these tracts, they could decussate or they couldn't, and they could project bilaterally. There's a variety of patterns. Those neurons whose cell body are within the cerebral cortex and descend to lower motor neurons within the spinal cord and brainstem, those are collectively called the pyramidal system and that will include the cortical spinal tract which is going to be traveling to the spinal cord and includes the cortical bulbar tract which will be traveling to the brain stem and so keep this naming convention in mind cortical spinal where it begins where it ends cortical bulbar starting in the cortex ending in the bulb the bulb of what that's the brain stem the bulb of the flower of which we have the cerebral cortex being the elaboration and then we have the stem being for the brain stem now this naming convention the pyramidal system is a little bit funny because it's going to be referring to the pyramids which are only for the cortical spinal tract and not the cortical bulbar system so it's like all hands on deck they're only referring to a part of the person the hands to say they're on deck suffice to say this is a language that is standard the pyramidal system includes those neurons that will be traveling through the medullary period pyramids as well as those that will be ending within the brain stem so where are the cell bodies of the pyramidal system well they're going to be in the region that is anterior to the central sulcus that is they're within the frontal lobe and more specifically it will be the precentral gyrus and then interior to that the area six and so we have area four which is the same thing as precentral gyrus which is functionally called premotor cortex the region ahead of that rostral to that is area six called premotor cortex and then supplemental area is above that we see these regions on the medial wall as well this is the mid sagittal view there are several major brain regions that project to the pyramidal system and allow it to express the rich behavior that we have the rich number of skills that all of us have standing up crossing our legs pouring a cup of coffee and so on okay it's not just pyramidal system acting alone it's conjunction with these other systems and that will include the basal ganglia and the cerebellum and cortical association areas in the frontal cortex and parietal cortex and the first two basal ganglia and cerebellum are together called the extra pyramidal system because outside the pyramidal system you could call these upper upper motor neurons because they're not going to be projecting to lower motor neurons they'll be projecting to upper motor neurons which then will project to lower motor neurons now this designation extra pyramidal has been around for quite a while and it has a use once again as i um there's this distinction between language that you find within the medical community and language that you find within the basic science researcher this is not to speak ill of one or the other but communication differences between the two and utility within each of these communities so in basic science the people will not be referring to the basal ganglia as extra pyramidal but within clinical context this is this is common especially when it comes to symptoms but motor symptoms of dysfunction and that are not due to damage of the pyramidal system but to these extra pyramidal systems and typically people are referring to symptoms that relate to basal ganglia, but they may also mean the cerebellum. And there is a particular relationship, as we'll see in succeeding lectures, between the basal ganglia and the cerebellum to the pyramidal system, and that is the cerebral cortex is yoked to ipsilateral basal and contralateral cerebellum. Now there is regional specialization between the primary motor cortex, premotor cortex, and supplemental motor area. The primary motor cortex is going to be providing the greatest input to the descending tracts that will be destined to the corticospinal tract and the corticobulbar tract. When we're looking at the corticospinal tract, we can say how many synapses are found from primary motor cortex for the cervical level. And we can go from C2 to T2 in a monkey and count out those synaptic connections and we can see that it grows as reflecting the cervical enlargements and the number that are shown here is much larger than the number that are shown here for the very same specimen which was a monkey but certainly would be the case in your if you're human as well there's important functional differences amongst the various regions that comprise the pyramidal system and is as follows that primary motor cortex is going to have the closest relationship to muscle activity at the most direct relationship to an action whereas premotor cortex and SMA will have uh less direct relationships more abstract relationship for a given action so it would be let's say example the planning of the action well that's more abstract because you're not actually acting at a given moment it's that the plan for the action or um say sma where you have the initiation of the action still more abstract or sequences of actions which by necessity have to be compressed and organized in a more complex way and so this complexity and abstraction is going to flow from caudal to rostral regions basically as you're moving closer and closer to the frontal pole of frontal lobe. On the right you can see an example of this where primary motor cortical neurons that are sensitive to wrist flexion will be engaged during the go cue to say flex your wrist dear monkey and so there's a burst of activity whereas neurons that are in primary pre-motor cortex of the same animal will be active in this delay period when the animal is cued to it will soon need to flex the wrist so it is directionally specific for flexion versus extension of what is planned ahead so that's obviously a difference in abstraction here we have a depiction of the sensory homunculus and motor homunculus both are from the left hemisphere of the brain. The motor homunculus is shown on the right but actually originates from the left because it's being flipped around being flipped around this dotted line vertical dotted line of the central sulcus and that is separating the pre-central sulcus from the post-central sulcus. In both cases, you see a similar layout of the body surface. We have the face being most lateral and the leg being most medial on the post-central and pre-central gyri. Both cases, we have a great deal of cortical territory devoted to the face and devoted to the hand relative to their actual sizes that's why this is a very impactful image to see how large the hand is how large the face is as represented within the human brain as opposed to the physical space that we see in the periphery now there's not as much difference if you were to track the number of afferent fibers that are coming from it. There's a huge number of afferent fibers and a huge number of motor efferents. Still, you have this cortical magnification, a continuing multiplying of information that allows you to have the great sensory and motor acuity for these functions. the cortical spinal track will arise from neurons whose cell bodies are within m1 pm and sma that's the regions that are immediately interior of the central sulcus on the dorsal two-thirds and medial wall those axons will collect and then descend through the superhighway of the internal capsule continue on through the midbrain continue on through the pons and then the medulla decussating at its lowermost limit and continuing to the uh to the spinal cord ventral horn and so it's in the um spinal cord this is called the lateral corticospinal tract so this is one of the fununculi of the spinal cordans. About 80 to 90 percent of axons make this decussation and 10 percent continue ipsilaterally as the ventral spinal cerebellar tract, not spinal cerebellar CST, and they will for the most part decussate at the level that they'll innervate a given muscle. and so you will have this relationship that you should burn into your mind that the cerebral cortex of one side will control the contralateral body here's image showing a frontal section through the brain and we'll be able to envision the fibers descending from the cerebral cortex down through a portion of the brain stem so remember the cell bodies will be part of this gray matter that is this that is the cerebral cortex this gray matter and then the axons will collect together and descend and they are forming the internal capsule the internal capsule itself includes fibers they're coming up from thalamus to cerebral cortex. It is a major highway of information. So it has both ascending and descending fibers. Now returning to the descending fibers, they're going to continue through the cruce cerebri. So this is a cross section of the midbrain. You'll be seeing this in detail in the upcoming labs. So it will be descending through the crucery. Right next to that we can see the substantia ***** for reference. They're so very dark. And then those fibers disperse as they travel through the ponds because there's a traffic jam of information as the fibers from the pontine nuclei cross right to left and left to right to form that middle cerebellar peduncle. And so there's these descending fibers have to find their own individual way through this traffic jam and then recoalesce at the very top of the medulla to form the medullary pyramids, and then at the end, mostly decussating at the caudal portion of the medulla, which is the medullary pyramidal decussation. Now, if you have damage to anywhere above that decussation, it would lead to motor deficits on the contralateral side of the body. why because if I damage the tracks here well they're ultimately destined to the other side I just snip them before they made that decussation but they would have a terminal effect contralaterally so if I damage them before there's that decussation you'll see the effect on the opposite side whereas if I damage the lateral spinal cord which means for most of the fibers that had already crossed on over then the effect would be seen on that very same side there's a variety of situations that can lead to damage of the corticospinal tract it could be acute like a ****** or spinal cord injury it could be something that accrues over time like multiple sclerosis maybe something that you're born with and as expressed as you are developing as a young child like cerebral palsy in all these cases you would have impaired voluntary movement that include diminished strength speed and agility and what is affected most are the different portions of the body so much less for the proximal joints and axial movements why because that homunculus that we saw that had such a large representation for the hands and the uh the feet compared to the um um legs and trunks and so damaging this the the pyramidal uh track these corticospinal tracts that have that homunculus representations mean you'd specifically damage the areas that have the most representation okay now the positive clinical symptoms that one might see would be things that would not normally occur that's why it's a positive clinical symptoms as opposed to these negative ones that are a diminishment of what is normal so positive clinical symptoms would reflect quote-unquote release of brainstem and spinal circuitries that were previously either not expressed or under some well -managed control they are incorporated into healthy behavior and so this includes increased stretch reflexes abnormal synergies a Babinski sign and I'll have a slide touching on those next this slide is going to be shown three examples of dysfunction of the corticospinal tract augmented stretch reflexes abnormal synergies altered walking so stretch reflexes you could see it um either with a tendon tap that the leg swings up in this example the person's obviously is told don't don't kick the doctor i'm just gonna tap your leg let's see what happens if it swings up a little bit okay that's normal but if it swings up a lot okay this is uh altered stretch reflexes in this case uh image on the um left it was because the physician passively rotated um their forearm such that the elbow extended and uh for a healthy individual only with with very fast uh elbow extension uh motions imposed do we see a burst of activity whereas the individual that has cst damage we see a burst of activity at the very lowest levels of imposed motion abnormal synergies you're probably less familiar with this is going to be couplings between different joints that aren't normally expressed and are clearly dysfunctional so this person was instructed just to a b duct their arm But what they do instead is the AB duct plus elbow flexion, plus wrist flexion, plus the fingers all collapsing together into flexion. This is obviously dysfunctional behavior. This is not going to be satisfactory to reach out forward to grab a cup of soda in front of you because you can't open your arms. You can't reach on out because your elbow is flexed. These are very disruptive behaviors. And this is not going to be expressed on day one of the ****** or spinal cord damage. Initially, what you'd have is just plain weakness and flaccidity. That's called spinal shock. But given some time, this problem will manifest. best. Last example is altered walking. So we see this individual that has hemiparesis on the right side of the body. Here we see on the left because facing us. And so they're placing all their weight onto their unaffected side. And as they are moving their right leg forward, it is being lifted pretty much at the hip remember i said that the proximal joints are affected less and so they can't control the um the muscles controlling the knee and the ankle and uh toes as well and so that is kind of somewhat locked into place and they swing it around like a log of wood and you can see at very end how the toes are pointed there's this inversion of the foot and that's reflecting spasticity so these all have classical signs of corticospinal damage here we have a cartoon example of the normal response to ****** of the bottom of the foot from the heel to the ball, and that would be that the toes curl downwards. With corticospinal damage, one could have the Babinski sign. You don't want this. The Babinski sign or a positive Babinski, which is a bit redundant, is this and is indicative of damage to the CST. If the big toe flares up and the other toes fan out, you have yourself a Balinski. This is normal for infants under one year old. I'm not exactly sure why. I've never heard a good reason why it would be, it would reflect some functionality of an infant. Maybe it reflects just nothing, you know, really at all except that a stage in development obviously infants under one aren't walking around so much so regardless with spinal cord well with damaging at any point that will interrupt the cortical spinal tract be it in a cerebral cortex or internal capsule or the lateral phenunculus which is going contain the um cortical spinal tract axons you could have this misbehavior being re-expressed so it's been there that entire time it's just been kept quiet and you could also have it in otherwise healthy individuals don't ****** out but they had this um ictal state they had a seizure which is basically going to render a cerebral cortex having less effectivity normal effectiveness at the peripheral level so you can see it in that case as well a lesion of lower motor neurons either at the ventral horn or the nerve that is going to be projecting to the muscle same neurons right part of it is going to be the cell bodies in the ventral horn and then their axons which part of the same cell in the nerve damaging either of those will lead to the same result flaccidity of the muscle. You cannot activate that muscle. You cannot have acetylcholine release to it. And this is going to have obvious impact on voluntary strength. You're going to have diminished reflexes because you've removed one half of the reflex arc. You have the sensory side but you don't have the motor side you can have fasciculations and these are these isolated twitches of the muscles which are not sufficient really to move the limb but are just kind of little quiverings of the muscle and then eventually over time because the muscle is unused you use it or lose it it gets lost so you have atrophy and the individual that we see in this picture I mean he's a fit guy this is a military guy but he is has one thing that is not developed and that is his deltoid and that was because of a lesion to his axillary nerve so he was able to get along in life well but for certain directions of motion and he'd be have to put a little bit more in there from other parts of his body now we're going to be treating the corticolabar tract which is the other half of the pyramidal system these are the neurons that will be destined to portions of the brainstem that are going to be controlling various cranial nerve nuclei for the face and so the cortical bulbar tract are upper motor neurons and the cranial nerve nuclei are the lower motor neurons because those are the ones that will have a axon that will exit the cns become a nerve in the pns and innervate muscle so the cortical bulbar tract is that portion of the pyramidal system that will be controlling the effectors of the head and that is going to be allowing cortical control of chewing of the upper face lower face speaking swallowing tongue movements head turn and shrug so a whole pile of functions that are going to be the result of activation of lower motor neurons within the brainstem those cranial nerve nuclei they get input from upper motor neurons the corticobulbar tract now a notable feature of this system is that the there are axons that will be innervating cranial nerve nuclei on both sides will be ones that will be decussating and controlling the contralateral cranial nerve nuclei and others that will stay on the same side and control the ipsilateral cranial nerve nuclei and that is the case for most of these cranial nerve nuclei with the exception here outlined in red very important that the cranial nerve nuclei for the lower face only receives input from the contralateral hemisphere and what that means is that there is no ability of the system to compensate if there is damage on that side of the cerebral cortex whereas for the other functions there will be compensation. Now the tongue is notably asymmetric in its control. It's primarily contralateral control but there is some ipsilateral control so this comes up in the textbooks will come up in the clinical literature that you can see deviations of the tongue due to a cortical ****** on just one side and it may not be as striking as what you'd have for the lower face the lower face is very striking the tongue may or may not be but for the others you're really not going to see anything because it's bilateral implant let's look a little further on this example of inability to compensate for lesioning of the cortical tract in terms of the control of the lower half of the face we're looking at this fella and asking could you please smile for me and he's not doing a very good job of it on the lower half we can see that lip turned down while the forehead is in fact wrinkling so there's control of the upper half on both sides but not the lower half of the face on both sides and this deficit in function is because the cranial nerve nuclei that will be sending axons to the that ipsilateral musculature for the lower half of the face only receives input from the contralateral pyramidal tract from it was a facial motor cortex because of the pyramidal system the cortical bulbar system there was a sectioning and that's why it's dot dot dot dot because there's no more input from that side of cerebral cortex to the nucleus for the upper half and lower half in the face but the upper half of the face also gets input from the ipsilateral side hence there can be compensation And here we have a real-life individual who is expressing the signs of a lesion to the cortical bulbar system on one side of the cerebral cortex. The person's asked to grin or actually hear a growl, and we can see him growling away on one side with the upper and lower half of the face as well as the upper on the other side but the lower half of the face that would be on his left side remains flaccid that means that the damage is to the contralateral cerebral cortex so damage to lower motor neurons are going to lead to placidity because there's just no way of activating the muscle from that nerve you've sectioned it so it's not going to be able to release acetylcholine onto the muscle and cause contraction and so you get flaccidity this would be the case if you had releasing of lower motor neurons for the cortical spinal system and also for the um critical ball bar system this is an example for the cortical bulbar system because of the control of the face this individual was struck with bell's palsy so this is going to be an irritation of cranial nerve seven and amongst the various fibers that are carried by that nerve are the axons to control the upper and lower half of the face and we can see that one half of his face is flaccid this individual is asked to smile did on one side not on the other and so he's gonna have a variety of other issues because it's a mixed nerve as I as I mentioned you can see listed here a variety of functions which will cover a succeeding lecture but for the motor side the important thing is that one half of his face is flaccid okay as opposed to with cortical bulbar damage you would have the lower half of the face would be flaccid and we have another example of a lesion of a cranial nerve or nuclei this would be for controlling the tongue the individual that we see on the left when they're asked to push their tongue forward stick it out the tongue will deviate quite radically to the side. We see it's deviating to that person's left and that would be the side that they would have issues controlling the musculature because the muscles on that side could not oppose those on the right. So it's the left musculature that is flaccid, hence there's a deviation towards the left given the type of mechanical connections that one finds in the tongue this can have a very similar appearance if you have a a ****** that knocks out um a restricted region of the cortical ball bar system on one side so this individual here is also sticking their tongue out we see a deviation and it's not because of a problem of the nerve or the nucleus this problem in the cerebral cortex we can see this arrow pointing out this white area which was a knocked out portion of their cortical ball bar system and this was a notable paper because it was very very localized effect normally you would be starting to look for other areas that might be affected that would be nearby and what is nearby well the hand the hand would be nearby so you might see if there's an effect in the hand and the tongue you would be like oh i really think this is going to be a problem uh centrally we you're probably gonna do an mri anyway but that's what you're going down thinking is most likely um if you did not see that you really really would have to focus quite well and you might get a case report because it's that isolated lesion just for the the tongue that can happen but that is quite rare you've been introduced Broca's area in several lectures at this point such a distinctive region because it is involved in the control of speech and so damage to this area which is going to be found in the inferior frontal gyrus they call this the percolum and triangularis if you really want to nail on it but inferior frontal gyrus we have will result in expressive aphasia and I have a link of an individual suffering from that and you'll see that their speech is halting and it takes a great deal of effort to express themselves they do it in a with very short snippets they don't have a fluidity of speech and so on it needs to be emphasized that these people can eat fine They can eat. They can drink. They can open their mouth. They can smile. So they do have control of their articulatory system for other actions, but not in the context of speech. And now I want you to understand why the placement of Broca's areas makes sense given the other information that you have. We have the face representation right behind it. Remember, that's where the cortical ball bar system is going to be. So this is anterior to that. And what is anterior as we're moving on forward? More and more abstraction in terms of the motor command. So it is a frontal lobe function, it is a function of doing things, and for the face that is more abstract than chewing, swallowing, and so on. you might have noticed on an earlier slide that the cortical ball bar system all the things that can control about the face did not include the eyes the eyes are not controlled by the cortical ball bar system they're not controlled by the pyramidal system but we do have voluntary control of the eyes obviously i'd say please look to the left you can do it please look to the right you can do it so that means that there are cell bodies within cerebral cortex they're making sending their axons down to the brain some cranial nerve nuclei and what is that where are those cell bodies originating within the cerebral cortex answer frontal eye fields those frontal eye fields are found interior to area six which is also known as the premotor cortex so interior to premotor cortex we have the frontal eye fields area eight and that is going to be found on the superior and middle frontal gyrus and their axons will go to some portion of reticular formation that's called peripontine reticular formation, and from there to superior colliculus to control the eyes. Actually, from there, from superior colliculus, then to the cranial nerve nucleus. It's a very indirect relationship because there's a lot of complexity that's involved. Now, how do they control the eyes? Let's think about this. We know that the cerebral cortex controls the contralateral body. right and we know that this is seen for other aspects of cerebral cortex is involved in the contralateral world like vision so like the right occipital cortex is going to be involved in processing information for the left visual world and the right motor cortex is going to be involved in controlling effectors of the left side of the body what about the eyes well shouldn't you move your eyes to that part of the visual world that the occipital cortex on that side cares about yeah so that means that the will move the eyes into the contralateral visual field so that the right frontal eye fields will move the eyes to the left okay direct the gaze to the left if you have a problem with the frontal eye fields because of a ****** you will have deviation of the eyes in a way that would be consistent with that imbalance so we tonically deviated to the same side you can't move to the side that you normally would had there not been this deficit and so you could also miss out you can have some a bit of a neglect of that world simply because you're not moving your eyes to that now would the person be fine on a test of VOR function, which we know depends entirely on brainstem nuclei, that is, you passively move the head, twist it left and right, ask them to gaze straight ahead. Yeah, they would be fine on that. But this intentional control to direct their eyes, they would be compromised. The brainstem nuclei for controlling the body include tickler nucleus reticular formation and vestibular nucleus these are focused on controlling the proximal muscles of the limbs and the axis so their uh representation in a uh as a homunculus would be like we have on the left with really bulked out uh shoulders and pecs and quads and abs very different than what we have with a homunculus in the cerebral cortex where that would be these very large hands and a very large face. Now I mentioned the red nucleus, which is going to be the origin for the rubrospinal tract from the red to the spine because it's brought up in so many different textbooks. and it is a prominent tract in monkey models which are commonly used to understand motor control but for humans that rubrospinal tract is actually very small. Now we have a massive red nucleus and that is doing things that are very important for motor control and how it communicates with the cerebellum but the part of red nucleus that projects to the spinal cord is in fact very small in humans and it did have affected before the contralateral upper limbs I mentioned this as a almost as a cautionary note when you read these other textbooks because they will be referring to animal models because they're doing so many studies on animal models and sometimes you cannot generalize across different animals and this really exemplifies that there are nuclei within the brain stem that are part of reticular formation which is you might remember is very complex structure comprising many different nuclei and the ones that are within the brain stem that project to the spinal cord are called reticulospinal and there's ones that are situated in the pons and medulla and there's going to be lateral tracts and medial tracts I'm not holding you to that suffice to say that there are a number of tracks within the brainstem that are part of reticular formation that descend to control the body. For the most part, these have bilateral projections. It's a very large system and it's quite understudied because it's very technically difficult to record from these neurons because you're deep within the brainstem. Despite being understudied, we do have some important knowledge about what are capabilities within the reticular formation for controlling the body. There's this structure called MLR, the mesencephalic locomotor region, that when you stimulate it in a cat, the cat has been sectioned so it has no input from the cerebral cortex. You can have this cat standing on a treadmill, stimulate this MLR of the brainstem, part of the reticular formation, projections necessarily going to the reticular spinal tract, and you'll get coordinated walking. The reason I'm mentioning this is because this is an important site therapeutically that people are now targeting with deep brain stimulation and was 60 years after it was originally discovered. We also have the asymmetrical tonic reflex, which is something that is seen within children, newborns, that if their head is turned to the side, then that arm will flex and the other arm, which the head is turning away from, will involuntarily flex. And this will be re-expressed with cortical ******. You remember with cortical ******, you have that automatic flexion. Well, some of the circuitry for that is shown within newborns, this reemergence of reflex patterns that were dormant. And lastly, I should mention startle. So you walk behind somebody, you know, on a dark and rainy night in the parking lot and give a little shout behind them. They give a little startle and flex their arms together. That flexing protective response is another example of a system controlled through reticulospinal tract, but getting its original information from the, obviously, from the vestibular system. so the communication from other systems to reticulospinal tract not just um somatosensory information vestibular spinal tract is quite powerful in humans and is engaged if you were to fall to the left or fall to the right it would be responsible for extending your legs on the side that you're falling towards and we know that's the vestibulospinal tracts because of those connection patterns but also the what happens when you sever all the other nuclei that could be projecting from the cerebral cortex from the brainstem aside from the vestibular nucleus so there's a section just above the upper medulla when that's done to a kitty cat then we see extension of all of its limbs and so this has anti-gravity function for the upper limbs and for the lower limbs and this is most certainly the responsibility of the vestibulospinal tract so those brainstem tracks that we talked about can be manifest under situations of severe brain damage so these are individuals that would be unconscious and you could have somebody come into the er and if they show this posture where the legs are extended um and their upper extremities that's you the upper extremities are flexed as a mummy pose they call that decorticate and this is associated with a lesion above the red nucleus so you'll still have continued um activity of the regions there below the red nucleus so that would include itself red nucleus reticular formation and vestibular nucleus and so this means that the red nucleus is projecting to us is that it's going to be actually connected to the cerebellum that's what's going to still have that connection going on but regardless it's the hyperactivity of the remaining nuclei that are involved and We know that this elbow flexion is something that's very prominent for the reticular system. If the individual shows a decerebrate posture, that is that their legs are extended and their upper extremities are extended, this is a worse situation than before. Here, this indicates that the lesion is below the red nucleus. So red nucleus is no longer involved. Now you have the hyperactivity of reticulospinal and the vestibular nuclei. And it's interesting that this is an extension of both because you still have reticulospinal. So there's complexities that we do not yet understand, but we know that most certainly the red nucleus in its modulatory role vis -a-vis the cerebellum is in suffice to say if you're showing a decerebrate posture meaning that the lower extremity and the upper extremities are both extended then that means that the damage is more severe because it's extending below the red nucleus locked in syndrome is when you have a lesion within the pons that is so dense that it will interrupt the flow of information from cerebral cortex down to any levels within the pons and below so it's going to knock out all control for voluntary control of the body it's going to knock out so much voluntary control of the of the head of the face of the neck of chewing and so on what is left is blinking and a little bit of eye movements because those are the responsibility of cranial nerve nuclei that are above the lesion that are in the midbrain ocular motor nucleus trochlear nucleus. Those people can blink, but they can't say anything. You would normally think these folks are in a vegetative state, that they do not have consciousness, but they do. They're locked in their body. They can't tell you what they're experiencing. They can still feel the world, but they can't do anything about it. These cases have invariably been missed when they interview people afterwards. The time by which people finally realized it may have been months later, may have been years later. Very, very difficult to imagine what that was like. There is efforts underway to try to address this with different devices that are going to be detecting where people can look on a screen and communicate that way allow faster interactions it was a beautiful book and a movie i encourage you to watch called the divide diving bell and the butterfly it was written by this guy because he blinked it out he blinked out this book it's not a terribly long book as soon as it went to press uh the fella uh passed on but he had a contract to write a book and he said i'm going to enforce it they they've made one with me i'm going to write it. And it's a fantastic book by a very cultured editor of a fashion journal in France. It's a little while ago. All right, let's wrap up. Both the corticospinal tract and the corticobulbar tract are going to arise from precentral gyrus as well as rostral adjacent cortex. The corticospinal tract is going to project to the contralateral spinal cord, whereas the corticobulbar tract is going to project bilaterally to cranial nerve nuclei, except for the facial nucleus, which is going to be exclusively contralateral for the lower half of the face. Upper motor neuron damage can be expressed as weakness and ******* paralysis. Lower motor neuron damage is expressed as flaccid paralysis. Different descending projections from the brainstem have different projection patterns. And damage above and below the red nucleus leads to decorticate and decerebrate rigidity respectively i hope that presentation was clear i understand some complex material. Feedback is always appreciated.