Hello, everyone. This is Isaac Kurtzer, the Department of Biomedical Science, Old Westbury Campus. And this lecture is the second of our three concerning supraspinal motor systems, basal ganglia. We have four session objectives for this lecture. First, to identify what are the nuclei which comprise the basal ganglia. There's 10 of them, and they're going to fall within certain categories. Second, what are the connections amongst those nuclei that we just described and the connection of these nuclei to structures that are outside the basal ganglia? It's not just encapsulated, it has to communicate with the rest of the brain. Next, we need to describe a model that helps us understand what do these nuclei do in terms of coordinated functional behavior and lastly we need to understand how all this relates to dysfunctions of basal ganglia makes sense when we see a certain basal ganglia dysfunction how we can track that back to the nuclei to the neurotransmitters to the different functional components of the basal ganglia sequences of actions are important for navigating our lives they take a little time to develop once we've set them in place they can proceed pretty much automatically we call these habits and habits is the domain of basal ganglia so if you know this song about the different cranial nerves on top of olympus towering top and so on that song is because of a habit which is basal ganglia thank you very much same with a songbird same structure that it learns its song it's because of basal ganglia and then we can have disordered habits we can have compulsions and addictions and this is because basal ganglia is not serving us well so what is basal ganglia well it's got to be gray matter because you say ganglia but it's within in the cranium so that doesn't sound right ganglia aren't they outside the cns well it should be called basal nuclei but we're just going to stick with ganglia because that is the language that we've inherited over time so they're gray matter nuclei there's 10 of them and they're connected amongst each other in a very interesting way and they're going to communicate with the cerebral cortex to create these pattern sequences to create these habits and there's many different responsibilities for the basal ganglia because you don't just have habits of action you have habits of thought as well sky high view before we dive into the details it will be that cerebral cortex communicates with basal ganglia, which communicates with thalamus, back to cerebral cortex. And this forms a loop all on one side of the brain. So the left basal ganglia output nucleus would go to a left thalamic nucleus, which would target the left cerebral cortex, and then back down again. And then there's a lot of machinery within basal ganglia that is adding something particular to thalamus so it takes something from cerebral cortex and gives something back a bit different and so now we need to examine what are the nuclei how do they communicate with each other and their transmitters and this is actually a pretty long list that's one of the complexities of basal ganglia is that we have 10 nuclei that are involved and you'll see them here right now we can group the nuclei of the basal ganglia into three broad categories there is the striatum so the striatum will be composed of these three nuclei for the pallatum that will be composed of these three nuclei and And there's nuclei within the brainstem and diacephalon, which include many nuclei, only a subset are ones that are linked to the basal ganglia. Now, a neuroanatomist might be very strict and say only those things in striatum and pallidum are basal ganglia. But there is such a tight relationship. We're all going to consider them together as of the basal ganglia. now interestingly most of these nuclei release GABA okay now I don't know if you've seen that before that the connections amongst different circuitry major nuclei is through GABA this is a distinctive and characteristic feature of the basal ganglia two of them are gonna release dopamine and just one releases glutamate. Very interesting. The striatum is comprised of three nuclei, the caudate nucleus, the putamen, and the nucleus accumbens. All three of these are input nuclei of the basal ganglia. That means for the cerebral cortex to impact processing of the basal ganglia, it needs to do so through these nuclei. Now these nuclei influence others within the basal ganglion network by releasing GABA, which is an inhibitory neurotransmitter. Very interesting organization. Now, let's point to some of the geometrical features of these nuclei. Caudate has a C -shaped structure, as it is going to be following the lateral walls of the lateral ventricles. It is the lateral walls, so it will also have a C-shaped structure. The putamen is going to be surrounded by the caudate. It's an egg-like structure. And then there's going to be gray matter connections between these two, the caudate and putamen. And that will be the spaces between those gray matter connections are going to be white matter passing through that. And so when you have this white and gray matter in alteration and seen in cross-section, it looks like a stripe and that is why it's called the striatum now let's turn to the last nuclei here the nucleus accumbens which is found um just underneath the head of the caudate and interior to the potamen is comprised of three nuclei two for the globus pallidus one is the ventral pallidum. The globus pallidus is called so because it is globe-shaped and pale, and it is situated between the putamen and the thalamus. These two are separated from each other by the white matter of the internal capsule. And I am now circling the globus pallidus. This portion right here is the internal segment. This portion right here is the external segment. The internal segment will be projecting axons to the thalamus. It is a output nucleus of the basal ganglia. In contrast, the globus pallidus external segment is neither an input nucleus, like we would have with the putamen, nor an output nucleus, like we would have with GPI, that would be globus pallidus internal. Instead, it is intrinsic. It is neither input nor output nucleus. nucleus. The ventral palladium is not being shown on this figure, and that's fine. It's just giving you a general orientation. Now, it is an output nucleus of the basal ganglia, and it will be closest to the thalamus. Now, all of these nuclei release GABA, that is the GPE, the GPI, and the ventral pallidum all release GABA. And all the nuclei that we mentioned before, or striatum, they all released GABA as well. Now let's talk about four closely related nuclei that are not strictly basal ganglia, but for our purposes, we'll put them together in the same bag because of their intimate relationship. these nuclei strictly speaking are part of the diencephalon and midbrain there is the subthalamic nucleus which is lateral to that hypothalamus and the hypothalamus be forming the walls for that third ventricle that's for some spatial reference is going to be connected to both parts of the glovis pallidus is going to receive input from cerebral cortex and it will release glutamate that's the first time that we've seen glutamate being released as the last time we're going to be seeing it released it is exclusively the subthalamic nuclei within this collection that will release glutamate Now let's turn to these midbrain nuclei. There are two divisions of substantia *****. You may have not known that before. What people usually are referring to when they say substantia *****, it is the portion that would be releasing dopamine. And so this would be inferior to this subthalamic nucleus and this is going to have a modulatory function in contrast there is a region which is within the substantia ***** as a whole it is not going to be containing dopaminergic neurons those dark neurons that have melaton melanin as a stage and the creation of dopamine this is an output nucleus and releases GABA okay so we're back to GABA again lastly we have the VTA the ventral tegmental area and that is going to be analogous to the dopamine releasing division of substantia ***** it also does the same and it is immediately medial to it it. So this slide summarizes the information presented earlier about the 10 nuclei of the basal ganglia. We have the three main divisions, striatum, pallidum, and the nuclei of the midbrain diencephalon. We found that they're going to be nuclei that are inputs. Those are part of the striatum. We have nuclei that are outputs. Some of that is going to be the pallidum, some in the midbrain and we have nuclei there intrinsic to the basal ganglia that means that neither inputs nor outputs so that's going to be found in the pallidum and within the midbrain diencephalon the neurotransmitter of choice is GABA so seven of the ten nuclei release GABA onto their targets so it's going to be one nuclei inhibiting the other and then that one inhibiting an other which which creates the very distinct dynamics of the basal ganglia. There is just one nucleus that releases glutamate and there are two nuclei that release dopamine. Feature of life is that there's a complex relationship between a goal and actions. You might have a simple goal, I want cheese. But you're like, how am I gonna get it? Well, if you're a mouse, let's say that you're in a maze. So you're going to have to walk, you're going to have to turn, you're going to have to turn this way, then turn that way, walk ahead. And that needs to occur in a particular sequence. And if it doesn't occur in that sequence, you can get nothing or maybe you can take a bath. Okay. So the issue is how to create that sequence, that stable relationship that will achieve that goal, given the possible actions. and then you need to put them in the right order so for the mouse to get the desired cheese it will need to execute the proper sequence of action walk forward turn right walk forward turn left and so on and we can think of that as promoting certain actions and demoting others amongst the total repertoire of what the mouse is capable of and so this promotion demotion and linking of actions in chains is what basal ganglia does and sometimes an important thing is to just stop whatever it is that you're doing so for this mouse that is trying to get his cheese he better come to a standstill if a cat appears and be as quiet as possible. And we have this capability too, that we're in the middle of a sequence. We can just forcefully stop thanks to the basal ganglia. The next slides are going to describe the organization of the basal ganglia according to the Alvin de Long model. These are two individuals, Alvin and DeLong, they proposed it in 1990 and still the go-to model today. And that's really quite amazing because there's so many things that were famous at that time, like these kids on the block and they're no longer new and they're no longer kids. Feel free to ask your parents about this. So the Alvin-DeLong model is going to posit complementary pathways for this promotion and demotion of potential actions that I described previously vis-a-vis the direct pathway and indirect pathway it does not account for all the functions that we ascribe to basal ganglia but quite a few the direct pathway is going to describe the flow of information from the input nucleus of the basal ganglia to the output nucleus and see that is a direct pathway. There's no intervening nuclei between the input nuclei, caudate and putamen, which we remember are parts of striatum, and the output nuclei, which include the SNR and the GPI, the internal segment of the globus pallidus. This connection is inhibitory. You can see on the upper right this coding scheme where a blue and a circle indicate GABA is going to be released at this synapse. So the striatum is going to inhibit this output nucleus. And this output nucleus itself inhibits the thalamus. And this is disinhibition. So it will be disinhibition of the thalamus di because we have two inhibition because there's two inhibitions. Now the thalamus projects to the cerebral cortex. The cerebral cortex projects to the striatum and both of those connections are glutamatergic, so it'll be excitatory. So we have an excitatory portion and we have an inhibitory portion. The correct pathway is going to promote candidate actions by disinhibition. So you're going to be inhibiting the inhibitor. So normally the thalamus is kept under inhibition by the output nucleus of the basal ganglia. And they have high firing rates of activity in the thalamus. So by inhibiting the thalamus, we are making sure that it does not impact cerebral cortex. And then we can release the thalamus from inhibition by inhibiting the inhibitor so the striatum will provide more inhibition under appropriate conditions to the output nuclei of the basal ganglia and now these neurons are less active less inhibition on the target the indirect pathway describes the flow of information from the input nucleus of the basal ganglia to the output nucleus indirectly that means through intervening nuclei so the striatum will project to the external segment of the globus pallis and the globus pallidus then to subthalamic nucleus and subthalamic nucleus to the output nucleus of the basal ganglia and two of these connections are inhibitory we have a series of inhibitory connections we call that disinhibition and so that is going to have some effects ultimately on the thalamus that will lead to the demotion of candidate actions the indirect pathway is going to demote candidate actions because this chain of effects will lead to more inhibition on thalamus. That will be the ultimate effect of the indirect pathway. There will be more inhibition on the thalamus, hence the thalamus will be providing less excitatory input to the cerebral cortex. This is achieved because we have from the striatum to gpe that's external segment of globus pallidus to stn a disinhibitory connection and that means we're going to be inhibiting the inhibitor and the stn is going to be providing more excitation to the output nucleus of the basal ganglia the output nucleus of the basal ganglia is inhibitory and that means he'll be inhibiting the thalamus more This is somewhat complex, admittedly, but this is the arrangement to demote candidate actions or to put a break on the activity of the thalamus. We want more inhibition onto the thalamus, and this is achieved through the indirect pathway. More inhibition, less inhibition here, more excitation, and ultimately more inhibition onto the thalamus. In the example I gave before of that mouse that wanted to find some cheese and walking through the maze, there were times where he needed to stop all actions altogether, turning left, turning right, who cares? Just stop because of the presence of a very scary cat. Well, this blocking of all candidate actions is achieved through the hyper direct pathway. So there are projections from cerebral cortex to the subthalamic nucleus, and this is the hyperdirect pathway because the increased activity of the subthalamic nucleus onto the output nucleus of the basal ganglia is to inhibit thalamus. So it will lead to greater inhibition of thalamus, and this is the fastest way of routing that information. So they can sometimes call that countermanding, that you commanded something and then you said, no, no, no, no, I'm going to counter those already initiated actions. I'm just going to stop in my tracks. dopamine has a powerful effect on basal ganglia function dopamine is released by the substantia ***** pars compacta to the striatum as the input nucleus of the basal ganglia the striatal neurons fall into two different categories ones which have a d1 receptor the other ones a d2 receptor. So neurons that have the D1 receptor in their membrane will bind dopamine. And when it binds dopamine, the G-couple process will result in a decreased activity of that neuron. Whereas for the neurons that have D2 receptors in their membrane, when they bind dopamine, they will have a decreased activity because of the cascading process of the g -coupled protein. So you have this two different ways that neurons, striatal neurons, can be affected by dopamine. For one group, the D1 neurons, it's an increase in activity. For the D2 neurons, it's a decrease in activity. And those two categories of neurons have two different targets. One is going to be part of the direct pathway, whereas the other is the indirect pathway. And so you have increased activity, increased activation of the direct and decreased activation of the indirect. And the net result of that is the output nucleus of the basal ganglia is less active. It is getting less excitation and more inhibition, which means it will be inhibiting thalamus less. and that means that thalamus will be able to activate cerebral cortex more so the overall action uh effect excuse me of dopamine on the basal ganglia is to inhibit thalamus less and hence you'll get more action of thalamus on basal on cerebral cortex striatal neurons have receptors which bind dopamine and they have receptors which bind acetylcholine and the effect of acetylcholine is effectively the flip side of what we have for the effect of dopamine so for the d1 neurons meaning the striatal neurons that have a d1 receptor they will also have a acetylcholine receptor and when they bind acetylcholine the downstream effect of that is less activity of that neuron whereas neurons that have the D2 receptor it has a acetylcholine receptor as well and the effect of acetylcholine on that neuron is to increase its activity because they're different channel subtypes of these acetylcholine receptors and they're perfectly kind of balanced. The D1 goes one way and the acetylcholine goes the other and same with the D2. So think of the effect of acetylcholine on this network as effectively the flip of what we have with dopamine and the net effect is that there'll be more inhibition on the thalamus and that will mean less activity of the thalamus onto cerebral cortex the loop of information processing from the cerebral cortex to the basal ganglions then to thalamus and back to cerebral cortex can be described as channels where the information that is flowing through is kept partitioned along the way there will be different sources for the information in cerebral cortex passing on through the basal ganglia and then the thalamic targets will be distinctive for these four different channels limbic prefrontal, ocular motor, motor. And we categorize the last three as nigrostriatal and the first one here, this limbic, as the mesolimbic. As mentioned in the earlier slide, there are four channels that relate how basal ganglia impacts the processing of cerebral cortex, the motor, ocular motor prefrontal and limbic channels and by that it's meant that the areas of cerebral cortex that will be targeting the basal ganglia there's many different regions but that information that funnels on in is going to be kept separate along the way all the way back to the cortical receiving areas of the thalamus that receive their input from basal ganglia hence there are four different channels so basal ganglia is involved in a wide variety of functions because the cerebral cortex is involved in a wide variety of functions but there are separate channels within basal ganglia because we want to keep those functions relatively distinct so the cortical receiving areas are why the different channels have their name so motor is going to be the channel that will be receiving information by basal ganglia to supplementary motor area pre-motor and m1 whereas is ocular motor. The ultimate cortical receiving area is going to be frontal eye fields, and then prefrontal cortex for prefrontal, and cingulate gyrus and arbofrontal for limbic, and so on. So it makes sense, this naming convention. All these cortical receiving areas are in the frontal lobe. That is the region of the brain where you do things. You have thoughts, you have actions, Okay, whereas the corticostriatal pathway is going to be coming from regions of the parietal lobe. We also have the temporal lobe. We have posterior parietal cortex, primary somatosensory cortex, so a wide variety of areas funnel information into the basal ganglia. But the output of basal ganglia is to impact function of the frontal lobe. Now, what do you need to know in this incredibly complex diagram? Well, you need to know the things that I highlighted. And that should be straightforward for the cortical receiving areas because it's just perfectly linked to the name of the channel. So the striatal nuclei, that's a little bit complex, I admit. and the palatal nuclei is pretty straightforward because it's all the same except for the limbic channel. The limb channel is really the outlier here in terms of the striatal nuclei, the palatal nuclei, where it gets its dopamine from, and that is why it is branched off as the mesolimbic pathway because it is really quite a distinct thing. This figure duplicates the last column that we had in the previous slide showing that what are the ultimate targets of the cerebral cortex for the various channels of basal ganglia, and that the motor channel would be targeting, not surprisingly, motor areas. So premotor cortex, SMA, primary motor cortex, we have the ocular motor channel targeting the frontal eye fields and supplemental eye fields, prefrontal channel, targeting prefrontal cortex and the limbic channel would be targeting the singlet gyrus as well as orbital frontal cortex and so again the targets of the basal ganglia are all the frontal lobe different regions of the frontal lobe it should be noted that the basal ganglia also targets the brain stem so superior colliculus the mesocephalic locomotor region and other portions of the reticular formation are all targets of the output nucleus of the basal ganglia and they will all be receiving inhibition from that output nucleus i think it's important to mention that the basal ganglia is a ancient set of networks that's going to be found within the earliest vertebrates that we know of like a lamprey which is going to be dating back a half a billion years then we have much later 130 million years ago the first mammals and then us we basically start about 200 ,000 years ago so between this time of the earliest mammals and us live creatures like the tyrannosaurus rex and that means the tyrannosaurus rex had a basal ganglia pretty neat there are many different clinical manifestations of damage to the base of ganglia and movement disorders is one of them and that's one of the most commonly expressed so when it comes to movement disorders they can be focal or generalized that means it's going to involve just a single limb or am i involved like the entire body it could involve the unilateral or bilateral and if it was to be unilateral unilateral motor disorder that would be due to the dysfunction on the contralateral basal ganglia because basal ganglia projects to the same side thalamus, and the thalamus projects to the same side cerebral cortex, and the cerebral cortex is involved in controlling the contralateral body, so the dysfunction of the basal ganglia is going to be expressed on the contralateral side. Disordered motor action from damage to the basal ganglia can be characterized as too much or too little you can have either behavior that is slowed or even absent or you could have too much movement in terms of numerous involuntary actions that you certainly didn't intend so this would be hypokinetic or hyperkinetic and we could trace that back to damage to the different pathways we could have a lesion to the direct pathway which would ultimately lead to under activation of the cerebral cortex right because the direct act pathway is going to promote action hence a lesioning of that will lead to under activity of the cerebral cortex on the other side we can say a lesion to the indirect pathway would result in an overactive cortex because the indirect pathway should be involved in demoting um actions and if it is um dysfunctional then we would have as a result actions that should have been demoted but are not being that would be an overactive cortex so Parkinson's disease impacts about 1% of the US population over 65 and the typical age of onset of these symptoms is between 40 and 70 years now Parkinson's already done some damage to the nervous system before that time is just when does the symptoms become severe enough to the person goes to the doctor and gets a diagnosis now there's generally no familial tendency and there's very few things that we know about the external causes of Parkinson's disease so most often it is idiopathic meaning we just don't know in this person's life what was it that resulted in them having Parkinson's disease from our perspective it's just a battle of the time and the progression of this disease insidious so it just can continually robs from the individual and leading to disability and death within about 10 to 30 years given the current medications and treatments we have the defining pathology of Parkinson's disease is the death of the dopamine containing neurons of substantia ***** and the two images on the bottom left show individual that is healthy at least insofar as they do not have Parkinson's disease, dark areas that are quite extensive indicating the melanated cells of substantia ***** and that's pretty much absent for the individual that is on the on on the right with brain of that individual that was on the right who was diagnosed with parkinson's disease very few cells around here that are dark now there are a number of other brain abnormalities that occur with parkinson's disease most notably lewy bodies which are mif -folded proteins that under normal circumstances have to do with presynaptic release. And these are mif -folded proteins, cytoplasmic inclusions within a cell. And what are the cells that express that? Well, cells within a certain network of the brain that gets more and more and more distributed as Parkinson's progresses. So it's initially not found within the frontal lobes, for example, but eventually it will be and it's correlated with the progression of the disease. But Lewy bodies are not the defining feature because you can have Lewy bodies in a number of disorders that have Parkinson -like symptoms but are not Parkinson's. There's a separate lecture that will cover this complexity so there are a variety of symptoms of parkinson's disease the motor symptoms are succinctly described under trap has an acronym for tremor rigidity akinesia bradykinesia and postural instability and you have these other examples of hypotonic motor cyst symptoms like a face that is not showing spontaneously a expression of whatever their emotional state is and the voice is extremely soft and different individuals are going to show different degrees of these various symptoms I included a link here of a young fellow that clearly has a pretty advanced Parkinson's disease you can see what that's like now the non motor symptoms can be very debilitating and may even precede the motor system so it's something to be aware for yourself and for your loved ones and for the patients that you will eventually see that loss of smell is in fact the earliest reliable indicators for parkinson's disease but there can be others as well we have sleep disturbances autonomic disorders neuropsychiatric disorders and this would be reflecting dysfunction of those other channels of the basal ganglia the limbic channel and the the premotor channel we can understand parkin's disease within the albin de long model in the following way there would be a loss of activity within the direct pathway and a overexpression of activity in the indirect pathway. And so those two factors combined together lead to greater activity of this output nucleus of the basal ganglia that is receiving less inhibition from the direct pathway and receiving more excitation than normal through the indirect pathway. And so the output nucleus is more active than normal, and that will be providing more inhibition to thalamus than normal, leading to a diminution of excitatory input from thalamus to cortex. Parkinson-like symptoms can arise from a variety of causes and so you need to distinguish is it truly Parkinson's disease or is there another issue at hand? It could be head trauma that occurs with boxers. It could be exposure to a chemical agent that is seen in an industrial setting like manganese it could be exposure to a poorly designed synthetic drug and that is the mptp and so this was accidentally created as someone made a synthetic ****** and did it made a bad batch and there are a lot of young drug addicts that showed up in a frozen state in an apparently advanced parkinsonian state but it was not parkinson's disease per se because it did not have the typical etiology it just had a very similar end result and so a diagnosis other than idiopathic PD should be suspected if the symptoms are some metric and if you lack arresting Temer and if you are not having the proper response to dopamine dopamine levodopa that you introduce to an individual the basal ganglia is complexity in terms of its connectivity, the neurotransmitters that can modulate the circuitry provide you a lot of flexibility in how you would treat somebody that was suffering from PD. The most common way is to have the person take levodopa. And so this is a precursor to dopamine. so you say well i'm going to make sure that they synthesize more dopamine another thing that you can do is try to make more effective the already existing dopamine by subscribing a d2 receptor agonist okay one could also decrease the acetylcholine activity remember that acetylcholine and dopamine have roughly opposite effects what can go in and try to lesion out a nucleus or at least blunt its impact on the circuitry so there's too much inhibition that's coming from the indirect pathway then partially lesion let's just say gpe we have virtual lesions nowadays days, where it's deep brain stimulation. And the basic principle there is by adding in a signal that's non -informative, you break the communication between two elements that would be in communication. Just so if I just say, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, while you're trying to talk to your friend, you can't hear each other between me doing that. So that's basically what's going on with the deep brain stimulation is that they're providing a non -informative signal that blocks information transmission and you could change it up and say oh i don't want to put my needle here i want to put my needle there and that's why it's a virtual region and so last point is that all these treatments impact the symptoms not the underlying cause a patient suffering from hemibalismis would show fast ballistic movements either of their arm or their leg or their both their arm and leg on one side of the body hence it is hemi ballistic so half fast okay and this occurs with a lesion to the subthalamic nucleus on the opposite side and that could be understood as to remove the clamping down of motor action that is really the role of that hyper direct pathway so when you have greater activity of that subthalamic nucleus it will engage the output nucleus of the basal ganglia to inhibit the thalamus so when you remove that you're taking away the inhibition onto thalamus hence you have the ballistic movements so this could result with from a ******, and it can be addressed pharmacologically to an extent. Huntington's disease, it's not a common disorder, but it's one that's talked about again and again, because we really do have a good handle on what causes it. It's the CAG repeats for a particular protein Huntington and it's not that it was discovered in Huntington, New York. That's just a coincidence that you know that that's with Long Island. It's just the name of the protein. So if the individuals have a certain number of repeats they're going to be more and more susceptible to expressing this dysfunction at earlier earlier ages. And so it's a awful disorder that has motor dysfunctions and mental dysfunctions and the overall behavior is that you it's a hyperkinetic disorder so you show these dance light movements and your mental function is psychosis because your thoughts are kind of jumping from here to here to there as opposed to something like apathy and it is progressive and and it's terminal within uh 10 to 20 years of diagnosis and there are some ways of addressing the motor symptoms but not for um addressing the progressive of dementia this disease has a selective effect on the striatum that is the input nucleus or nuclei of the basal ganglia so this will include all of them but most especially the caudate so for a person that died without this disorder we can see their presence of their caudate nucleus and we can't find any gray matter like that in this individual who suffered from huntington's disease but maybe a little bit more visibly apparent to you would be the expansion and dilation of the ventricles the lateral ventricles here because of the death of the neurons that would form that wall as that wall falls down the fluid cavity expands a constant concern is prescribing a medication to address one problem and creating new problems sometimes these new problems could be extra pyramidal and so that's why you have the warning label on the medication. An example of that would be with D2 antagonists to treat nausea and unfortunately the person shows PD-like symptoms as a result and so they would be have rigidity like somebody suffering from PD but you know it's not PD because they showed it soon after this medication and they show it bilaterally and so you can take someone off this medication and still these symptoms will persist for some time sometimes permanently an example of that the permanent induction of basal ganglia dysfunction is tardive dyskinesia So meaning it took a while from the exposure of the medication for these the symptoms or actually this damage to become apparent. So that's why it's late. It's a late onset for showing the damage that was done. A movement disorder that's characterized by them, you know, smacking their lips and rolling their tongues and chewing. and this stereotypical nature and the fact that they could voluntarily suppress it if they focus their thoughts and then it will immediately resume as they their attention is deflected really exemplifies that automatic nature that habit formation mechanisms of basal ganglia all right so that's all the material that we have for this lecture let's uh give a overall view of what we've covered so the basal ganglia is a collection of nuclei that are communicating with cerebral cortex disinhibition is a prominent feature of its internal processing so nucleus a inhibiting nucleus b which inhibits nucleus c the three primary circuits in the albin de long model are the direct pathway indirect pathway and hyper direct pathway and some aspects of basal ganglia dysfunction could be understood within this framework This is a lot of difficult material. I hope it was presented clearly. Feedback is appreciated.