Hello everyone, this is Isaac Kurtz of the Department of Biomedical Science, Old Westbury Campus, and this will be another of the lectures on the supraspinal motor systems, this one concerning the cerebellum. We have four session objectives for our lecture today. First off, we need to understand the general organization of the cerebellum. There's lobes of the cerebellum, just like the cerebral cortex. What are they? where are they, nuclei for the cerebellum, input pathways, output pathways for the cerebellum, and so on. Then we need to understand how those inputs and outputs are linked to different parts of the brain, spinal cord, brainstem, and cerebrum. And then we need to zoom on in and say how is it that the circuitry of cerebellum is allowing it to do its job? What does that mean on that more detailed circuit level and lastly we need to understand the regional specialization of the cerebellum just like you have for the cerebrum it's divided into various regions what are those functions for these various regions and what occurs when we have deficits cerebellum means little brain in Latin. And like the big brain, the cerebral cortex, it is a gray matter sheet that has many different folds so that we can pack in as much processing into a confined space. But the little is a bit of an exaggeration because, in fact, if you were to unroll that sheet, it has about 80% of the surface area of cerebral cortex and 80 percent of the neurons in the brain so that that's quite shocking if you just looked at it maybe they'd name it otherwise if they knew those facts at the time regardless it is a region of the brain that is critical for coordination and damaging it will lead to um significant issues in coordination be it your eyes be it moving your body moving your limbs or speaking and so on but you do not have a diminishment of strength if one was to have cerebellar damage you can take it out uh entirely and you'd be just as strong just be terribly coordinated because that's really what its job is is a part of the extrapyramidal system so its neurons are going to be impacting the upper motor neurons, which themselves directly influence the lower motor neurons, but it doesn't influence the lower motor neurons itself. Now, there are many different functions of the cerebellum, as one could imagine, for a structure that is so extensive being 80% of the surface area of the cerebral cortex but most of our understanding is about motor coordination there's less understanding about its role in cognition and emotional processing the last thing I want to mention here is a interesting historical fact is that we developed some of our modern understanding of the cerebellum due to neurologists examining World War One vets, British, and they suffered, a number of them suffered damage to the cerebellum because of the particular hat they were wearing as opposed to the Germans that had a different hat helmet and this some of the key observations that were made there in terms of ataxia stand with us to this day as mentioned in the slide before most of our understanding about the cerebellum concerns its role in motor coordination whereas undoubtedly it has a much broader role it is ultimately going to be getting influences from parts of the cerebral cortex that are not related in any obvious way to motor coordination like prefrontal cortex for example but our understanding of those capabilities are limited because people just aren't doing the studies there's about But 10% of the research on the cerebellum is there is to the cortex, which is obviously not matching the 80% of its cortical surface and 80% of the neurons in the brain. So if you went by neurons, you went by surface area, it doesn't match how much time is being spent on these areas. I'm just pointing to some recent research that's trying to bridge these gaps. These are things that are in development that you have. activation of the cerebellum during a mental rotation task or when the person is trying to think of different verbs like run and jump and so on so it is involved in cognitive functions we're going to be pushing that off for the rest of the talk you slides really gonna be going into some more detail about the anatomy of the cerebellum and what what comprises its organization there are lobes and regions of the cortical sheet comparable to what we have for cerebral cortex here we also have these distinctive peduncles which are going to be fiber tract hearing information to cerebellum or away from cerebellum internal nuclei this is a very distinct feature of the cerebellum there's going be nuclei that will be its output from the cerebellum and they're inside the cerebellum and then there are associated external nuclei these are nuclei that are intimately related to the cerebellum they provide inputs to the cerebellum but they are not cerebellum per se and we'll go through each of those in its turn the folded gray matter sheet of cerebellar cortex is divided into three lobes, two of which we see from this bandage, which is superior. I'm a bird flying above and the googly eyes are pointing straight ahead. There is the anterior lobe, which is suitably in the front. There is the posterior lobe, posterior to it. The two are divided by the primary fissure the posterior lobe is going to continue wrapping underneath and then there's gonna be a floccular nodule lobe which is hidden inside here we'll see it soon enough now there are different regions of the lobes and the centermost region the midline region is called vermis like worm. I don't see a worm here, but the anatomist did. And then there are the hemispheres. You have a hemisphere to the left, you have a hemisphere to the right for both the anterior posterior lobe and the floccular nodule lobe that we'll get to soon. Now you can divide that hemisphere into the lateral division and the medial division. So the lateral is the most lateral and the medial is what abuts the vermis and continues out about an inch or so and that's also called paravermal but we'll call it medial hemisphere here we have the disembodied cerebellum again this time from the inferior view so it'd be as if this person's laying on their back and were able to see up their nose. Let's get rid of that now. And we have a great view of the posterior lobe because that's really most everything that we see from this vantage. The posterior lobe is wrapping around on the backside and the composes the underneath of the cerebellum. No, you cannot see the anterior lobe from this view, but we are able to see some of the phallocular nodule lobe, which is sticking out right in front. I'm highlighting it right here. You can see this little outcropping. There's a little out propping right there as well and it looks kind of like a bumpy tongue so it's sandwiched on the anterior side between the anterior lobe and the posterior lobe which is wrapping up underneath it and making kind of a floccular nodule sandwich between those two now you have the midline region continuing so you have vermis on the anterior lobe, vermis on the posterior lobe, and vermis on the inferior portion of the posterior lobe. You also have the lateral hemispheres and the medial hemispheres so these are just general designations that you have that span the different lobes. Here we have a mid -sagittal view of the cerebellum with the cerebrum and brainstem intact. I can draw a little googly eye here for references. The googly eye is looking forward. That is anterior. And there are three lobes that we're able to see in this view and not in the other views. There is the anterior lobe which is the most anterior and superior of the three and that will be separated from the posterior lobe by the primary fissure the posterior lobe is going to continue on the underside of the cerebellum it is the underside of the cerebellum and sandwiched between the two is the floccular nodule lobe and so this particular division of the floccular nodule lobe is called the flocculus and those outcroppings that we saw from the inferior view those would be the flocculi so there's one for the left there's one for the right it's a paired structure and then the verbal region of the floccular nodule lobe is the nodulus and that lobe is separated from the posterior lobe by the posterior lateral fissure and so this view um really does a nice job showing the relative sizes of these three lobes. This one is by far the smallest, the floccular nodule lobe. They'll be followed by the anterior lobe, which is nothing to be trifled with, but is only a half of what you see in the superior view, whereas the posterior lobe is so much more developed. It takes up the rest of the superior view and all of the region underneath it here we have a cartoon cross-section of the cerebellum and the adjoining brain stem that shows the relative positions of the deep cerebellar nuclei and called deep cerebellar nuclei because they're deep within in the folds of the cerebellum that's how you have to cut on through it because they're all hidden away and there are three groups on each side most laterally we have the dentate nucleus which is shown in red you can see how large that is it's supposed to look like teeth so i'm told we have the interposed uh nuclei and so that means that they're in between the dentates and then the most medial nucleus which is the fastigal and there's names for these interposed which you don't need to you're not going to be held to globosa ebola form and I should note that we have the nodulus at this level of the section that's sticking on out and that's as you might remember the vermal portion of the floccular nodule lobe and so you're only able to see these nuclei with a together at a very specific section because though the dentate is quite large these other nuclei are relatively small and would be hidden within that white matter that's what I'm drawing around right here this the white matter which are axons um for the cerebellum information going in and information going out now i should mention right now what is the general function of these these are the output nuclei of the cerebellum so you have processing within the cerebellar cortex then we'll be sending axons which terminate onto these deep cerebellar nuclei. And then these deep cerebellar nuclei, DCN, will be projecting axons out back to the rest of the nervous system. So this is a gate out of the cerebellar cortex. It's an interesting flip to the gate to cerebral cortex, which I trust that you remember is a thalamus. Now we have two different examples of actual brain tissue sectioned in a way that brings out the deep cerebellar nuclei. The image on the left is from a frontal section and so this highlights the general geometry of the cerebellum quite nicely insofar as the more medial region is much more elevated than the lateral regions we can see that this curves on down and that's to accommodate the temporal lobes they're just kind of sitting down on top of the cerebellum now returning to deep cerebellar nuclei we can see this massive dentate gyrus I hope that you can see these paired structure for the interposed nuclei as well as the medial festigal nuclei. And again, I want to point out how large that dentate nucleus is and that it's situated most laterally. The image on the right is interesting. It's all the white matter has been scraped away above it and to the side and around it. And so you can really see that these These are these structures of this crumpled nature, this dentate nucleus, while these other nuclei are more compact, interesting pebbles. There are a number of nuclei that are not of the cerebellum, but they have an intimate relationship with the cerebellum. And this will include the red nucleus, the pontine nuclei, the vestibular nuclei, and the inferior olive. We're going to be covering this in more detail and in several places, so we don't have to cover everything right now. We'll get to this again and again and again. But I want you to remember that you've seen the red nucleus before within the rostral midbrain. And so that is going to be receiving a powerful output from the cerebellum. I mean powerful in the sense of many different fibers from the cerebellum will be targeting the red nucleus, and that will be from the contralateral side. We have the pontine nuclei, which we encountered for a brainstem and anatomy lecture. I was saying, well, these are going to be providing inputs to the cerebellum. And you might remember that would be the axons of the pontine nuclei form the middle cerebellar peduncle. there's the vestibular nucleus or found within rostral medulla and that's going to be sending inputs to cerebellum and they'll be receiving outputs from cerebellum as well and then there is the inferior olive found in the upper half of the medulla and that's going to be relaying inputs to the cerebellum as well and so there's a lot of information here about like well it's control this one's consular this one's epsilon we'll break that up in some subsequent slides I just thought it would be a good place to to introduce that information now and set that machinery in your mind in motion okay Okay, very quickly, this is just pointing to actual sections, transverse sections through the brainstem, showing the inferior olive within the medulla, showing within rostral medulla, the vestibular nucleus, showing within the pons, pontine nuclei, and showing within rostral midbrain that enormous red nucleus we have a view of the cerebellum which we have not seen before and that is looking at it directly head-on so if the person's head was intact we'd be looking at their eyes but instead we We removed all of them, sectioned the cerebellum from the brain, and the cerebellum just kind of floating in space. That's what we're looking at straight ahead. And this is able to bring out a number of important features of the general anatomy of the cerebellum. We'll begin with the peduncles, which will be communicating between the cerebellum and everything else. You have to have fiber tracts, axons, that are collected together, sending information to the cerebellum. And then we'll leave information from the cerebellum. No Wi-Fi. so we have the superior cerebellar peduncle the middle cerebellar peduncle and then this inferior cerebellar peduncle in addition we can now see the flocculus sandwiched between the drawing it right here I'm assuming you can see it on this other side that would be sandwiched between the anterior lobe above it and the posterior lobe underneath it and to the side of it okay and so it's otherwise it is pretty much hidden this is the best way we can see the blockless and see that it is this paired structure the nodulus is the mid-line portion of the phallocular nodule lobe. So it is actually connected to the phalloculus. It's kind of hidden underneath this peduncle. So it will be connected to the phalloculus and that will be the vermal. It's like the vermis of the phallocular nodule lobe. Lastly, I want to mention this large portion on which is part of the posterior lobe and it is inferior and most medial and we can see how distinctive its swellings are this is the tonsil so the tonsil is part of the posterior lobe and the tonsils comes up again and again in clinical scenarios because these could be displaced through the foramen magnum if you have enough pressure from above with hydrocephalus or if there's some underdevelopment of the cerebellum so that it can't resist the pressure from above. This is called Chiari formations and so you can see why that would be the case because they're on the inferior side and they're the most medial portion of that posterior lobe the cerebellar communicates with three major portions of the nervous system the spinal cord the brainstem and the cerebral cortex that means it's going to be receiving information from all of these and it's going to be relaying information to most of these it's not going to be directing directly sending axons to target the spinal cord but it will be receiving information from the spinal cord likely remember the dorsal and ventral spinal cell valetraxel from the spinal cord, and they'll be going to the cerebellum because it says spinal cerebellum. And there's a number of tracts from the brainstem. We talk about those major peduncles, but within a peduncle, there's going to be many different tracts from various structures, which we'll touch on shortly. And then for the cerebral cortex, you can see for all the regions that are not colored yellow. We know in the monkey that it is sending afferents to the cerebellum, so it's a wide amount of territory and these are regions that are not sensory motor at all necessarily like the temporal lobe that's a sensory motor. So there's a lot of information that's flowing into the cerebellum. Now an important feature of the cerebellum that separates, excuse me, separates it from the cerebral cortex is that it's involved in controlling the ipsilateral body. And the cerebral cortex is involved in controlling the contralateral body. So that means that it needs to be some information that crosses from right to left and left to right for these two structures to communicate with each other. This is a listing of all the afferents and efferents within the peduncles and what I'm trying to do is to impress the variety of structures or types of information that is being relayed to the cerebellum. So the afferents are going to include a vestibulocerebellum or So for the face, reticulocerebellar, the libocerebellar, again and again, many detectocerebellar, many different types of information flowing in. A corticopontine cerebellar is enormous, so all the stuff ultimately from the cerebral cortex. And then there's going to be outputs from the cerebellum targeting many different areas. The thalamus, red nucleus, tectum, vestibular nuclei, reticular formation, on and on. You are not expected to know all of this. It's not to give you, you know, heart palpitations, but to kind of understand the breath. What you need to know is on the next slide. I've done a major simplification here for the inferior, middle, and superior peduncles, but one that captures most of the complexity that we saw in the previous slide, which is that we can start off the middle period cerebellar peduncle. There's no simplification there because these are all afferent fibers. They're traveling to the cerebellum that originate in the pons. Those are the pontine nuclei. They're doing it, relaying that information, and they receive inputs from the cerebral cortex. so that's cortical pontine cerebellar that is that is definitely the case the inferior peduncle it's we're just going to say that this will be comparing all of the aphrod tracks it's not entirely true but we will it's a best place to to make a simplification whereas the superior peduncle is the primary output of the cerebellum primary relay of the cerebellum so when talk about the superior peduncle those will be the efforts there are three major functional divisions of the cerebellum and these reflect different degrees of motor sophistication and they reflect different points in how we have evolved to be where we are now. So the vestibulocerebellum is going to be processing information about orientation. So it'll be processing signals from the vestibular nuclei and that will be targeting the floccular nodule lobe. So it's involved in head -eye coordination imbalance and this is present in the earliest vertebrate that we are aware of so that's a picture of a jawless fish which would like predate dinosaurs so this has been around for a long time so a spinal cerebellum would be those regions of the cellum cerebellum including the vermal or vermis vermal and paravermal regions so that would be medial hemisphere of the interior and posterior lobe and this will be receiving inputs primarily from the spinal cord and this is important for axial control and gait and so on well developed in a kitty cat and then we have the cerebrocerebellum which is going to be processing information from the cerebral cortex so this would be the lateral hemispheres of the two lobes and it will be receiving input ultimately from the vis-a -vis the pontine nuclei so that's how information from the cerebral cortex is transmitted to the cerebellum is through those pontine nuclei so here we have a fella jamming away and that took a lot of time and effort and nascent ability to achieve his level of guitar mastery and so that would be requiring the cerebral cerebellum the three functional divisions of the cerebellum reflect the cortical particular cortical territories the particular portions of the loaves but also the cerebellar nuclei which are the output of the cerebellum the vestibular cerebellum stands alone in that it does not require any output nucleus it's the simplest of the structures and it does not have its own dedicated output nuclei it just sends output from the its cortical territory while the others do have output nuclei the most prominent of these is the dentate nucleus which is situated most laterally and is associated with the lateral hemisphere which is the cerebro cerebellum so you could see how those those those things go together a large lateral nucleus and this large elaborated cerebrocerebellum. All the remaining nuclei and cortical territory would fall within the spinocerebellum. This slide diagrams the flow of information between the cerebral cortex and the cerebellum. As you know, the cerebral cortex is involved in controlling the contralateral body while the cerebellum is involved in the control the ipsilateral body. And so for these two structures to communicate with each other needs to be a decussation of information. And it goes as follows. The cerebral cortex would be sending its fibers down to the pontine nuclei. These are corticopontine fibers. These would be part of the cru cerebri targeting the pontine nuclei. Those efferents from the pontine nuclei are crossing the midline, forming the middle cerebellar peduncle, entering into the cerebellum, and then the cerebellum on that same side would be sending efferents out through the superior cerebellar peduncle to the contralateral thalamus, which will be communicating with the ipsilateral cerebral cortex so thalamus sends its outputs always going to be targeting that ipsilateral cerebral cortex and so there's that decussation of the superior cerebral peduncle that we see in the midbrain it will be targeting among other things the contralateral thalamus before the red nucleus is going to be tightly related to the cerebellum receiving inputs from the contralateral cerebellum so that a decussation that is the superior cerebral peduncle going left to right it will be targeting the contralateral red nucleus red nucleus will be communicating to the ipsilateral inferior olive and And then this structure will be communicating with the contralateral cerebellum. So it's really hard to keep it in words. So that's why it's so much better to draw out. And you should note that this communication from the olive to the contralateral cerebellum is vis-a-vis the inferior cerebellar peduncle. We have the communication of the vestibular nucleus with the cerebellum. this will all remain on one side there is no decussation so the vestibular nucleus of one side will say the right will be sending its outputs to the cerebellum through the inferior cerebellar peduncle remember the inferior cerebellar peduncle is the primary input to the cerebellum for everything that is not pontine okay so everything else that's the input to the cerebellum all the other appearances are carried through the inferior cerebellar or peduncle and then there'll be communication back to that vestibular nucleus on the same side vis -a-vis this appears cerebellar or peduncle whereas the previous slides showed how information is relayed to the cerebellum and from the cerebellum. Here we're going to get some insight into the processing within cerebellum. So there is the deep cerebellar nuclei and the cerebral cortex. And you remember, or so I hope, that the principal output of the cerebellum is through these deep cerebellar nuclei with the exception of the floccular nodule lobe. Now these deep cerebellar nuclei are going to be getting inputs from three main sources of information. One is going to be from the cerebellar cortex itself and these are the output cells are called purkenji cells and they will project to the deep cerebellum nuclei and they'll be inhibiting it okay the um other two inputs would be the mossy fibers and climbing fibers so those are going to be originating from somewhere outside the cerebellum the climbing fibers are exclusively through the inferior olive so the inferior the olivo cerebellar tract will be targeting the deep cerebellar nucleus and it will be excitatory synaptic release will be releasing glutamate we also have the mossy fibers which is everything else everything else that is not from the olive would be its axons are the mossy fibers and that will also be excitatory inputs glutamatergic inputs and so we can see something like a different signal here where there's going to be a positive and a negative and the difference between those is the cerebellar outputs. So what is going on in the cerebellar cortex is the processing of these, of some different types of signals, a measured signal and then a highly processed signal. And so it's these measured signals and then ultimately this highly processed signal from the cortex that is going to be compared. The cerebellar cortex has three layers to it. There is the molecular layer, the granule cell layer, and the Purkenji cell layer. The granule cell layer is going to be filled with granule cells. There are so many of these granule cells, more than all the other cells of the nervous system combined because they're very, very small and packed very, very tightly together. The Purkenji cell layer is one layer thick of Purkenji cells. So that's the cell bodies of them. And they are providing the output of the cerebellum. The granule cells provide input to the Purkenji cells because the Purkenji cell dendrites are in the molecular layer and the axons of the granule cells are in the molecular layer. So that means that a Purkenji cell is going to be contacted by many, many, many different granule cells and that is the data compression that is going on within the cerebellum that is what is the nature of coordination taking all the inputs which are basically multiplied and decorrelated in the granule cell layer from all those sources of information that we have from the mossy fibers and then the output of the cerebellum is a reduction of all these inputs that's good kind of sky high view of what it means to have coordination taking all this information and compressing it down just like how a regression line would be able to summarize a bunch of points of data and now you just say y equals a x plus b as opposed to you know 20 000 data points that's kind of a sky high view of what's going on so let's summarize the internal connections that you do need to be um competent in and understand that is that there are climbing fibers and mossy fibers climbing fibers originate from the inferior olive they excite cerebellar cortex and the deep cerebellar nuclei the mossy fibers are all the other afferents that enter into the cerebellum they'll also excite the cerebellar cortex and deep cerebellar nuclei the purkenji cells are the output of the cortex not necessarily that not necessarily the output of the cerebellum but for the most they are the output of the cerebellar cortex. Most of the output from the cerebellum is through the deep cerebellar nuclei. They're going to be processing the inputs from those three sources listed above as the difference between the two. The one exception is the simplest functional division of the vestibulocerebellum and its output is going to be from cerebellar cortex it does not have to go vis-a-vis a deep cerebellar nucleus. Cerebellar disorders can result from causes as diverse as exposure to lithium, chickenpox, or multiple sclerosis. There There are so many different disorders and traumas and events that can impact the cerebellum given its size and its placement and its vascular supply. Ataxia is the most common symptom of all of these and ataxia again is the lack of order, ataxia. So you'd have a discoordination in the timing and magnitude of movement. This could lead to overshoots and misdirected movements and at the end, as a compensatory process, oscillations about the endpoint. It is not expressed as weakness. There's no paralysis that is involved or spasticity. So it is quite different than the upper motor neuron disorders that we characterized before and the lower motor neurons we characterized before. This is extrapyramidal. So the symptoms are broadly similar to what we see with alcohol intoxication, at least insofar as their motor expression. And this is what we scrutinized in a, quote, standard field sobriety test. can the person walk on a straight line what do the eyes look like when they're trying to follow a pen can they touch their finger to their nose and so a few other important points as that damage to just one region mean functional region of the cerebellum is rare because for example each cerebellar artery will supply multiple divisions and then events like hydrocephalus that would act to push the tonsils down would affect both the spinal cerebellum and the vestibulocerebellum but the the the the symptoms that one shows is still nonetheless reflecting dysfunction of particular specialized regions and we can most certainly say that damage specifically to one side would impact coordination on the same side because cerebellum controls the ipsilateral body. Signatures of damage to the cerebrocerebellum or that would be pontocerebellar disorders or damage to the lateral hemispheres. There's a number of ways of describing that because they all go together. The symptoms would include ataxia as we discussed before but more specifically this intention tremor. I mentioned the oscillations that are very evident at the intended terminus of the movement and this is not a resting tremor there is this great word uh dysdiadachokinesia okay so dysdiadachokinesia ddk this would be the person's trying to quickly supinate their hand pronate their hand and they just don't do it an orderly way you could do with supination you could also do it with the foot and and tapping there's slurred speech so it's not just the cerebellum is involved in controlling their limbs it's involved in controlling speech speech is a very precise well-timed behavior so and if somebody has drank to excess you can see that they throw their speech this is because they are deficient in the engagement of cerebellar mechanisms to coordinate that movement there's also low muscle tone. Now some of the causes for this would be to affect nucleic nuclei or lateral hemisphere or pontine degeneration. Spinal cerebellar dysfunction would be manifest in a toxic gait. That is the signature. A toxic gait is a person who tries to walk forward and they're going to be stumbling they're going to be stepping in a regular way they'll have a wide stance if you ask them to have a lombard stance of going heel toe heel toe then you really can see that they they easily fall over this is as if they're intoxicated by alcohol so you could have this result from chronic alcohol ***** you could have this result from an underdeveloped vermis that's occurs with Dandy-Walker syndrome. You could have this if the tonsils are displaced with Arnold-Chiari syndrome. So anything that'd be affecting that vermis and the paravermis or the region immediately around that, the medial hemispheres, then would lead to spinal cerebellar expressions of dysfunction last that we have dysfunction of the vestibulocerebellum so this is the floccular nodule lobe and this would be involved in orienting one's body being able to tell what's up what's down and controlling various aspects of eye movement so the symptoms would be wide stance because they don't know what's up what's down they feel unsteady on their feet they feel dizzy so they're going to spread their legs out if they do fall they you know they might reliably fall on one side because we have that ipsilateral control of the vestibulospinal system that activates those anti -gravity muscles of the leg to extend the lead it if instead you supported the body if you you know brace them and put them on a seat they could move their limbs in a coordinated way but that wouldn't work in the real world because they wouldn't know if they're have like leaning to one side or leaning to the other as a cat these persistent oscillatory saccades that are called nystagmus so your eyes just moving like it's uh they'll have a uh like a beat they'll call it beating to the side but but but looking to the side looking back looking aside it's like an oscillation then that is a characteristic of vestibulocerebellar dysfunction that's something that's tested you know in a roadside battery if a police officer thought that you're inebriated uh vertigo and nausea is referring to vertigo but you also feel the symptoms of oh, I feel awful because I feel like I'm spinning. And so some causes for this would be medulloblastoma, which as you might know is a common childhood cancer, the most common childhood cancer. It actually originates within the cerebellum. There's viral infections. I mentioned chicken pox before. So you can have an acute case of vestibulocerebellar dysfunction and just it'll just go away you know chicken pox goes away so some of these are problems that really are going to reflect deeply serious and long-lasting and sometimes you know we wish it was more often that they could just go away and resolve by their own themselves a handy dandy mnemonic that will help you to look for cerebellar symptoms and you now should know what each of the components of this mnemonic is Danish so that's dys, dyadacko, kinesia, ataxia, nystagmus, tension tremor, speech, hypotonia, Danish. Essential tremor is the most common motor disorder affects two percent of the population just imagine how many people that you know that separate you might as well it might be small now and to become more and more prominent later on not everybody's going to be going to a movement specialist there are some things that can get by depending on how severe it is nonetheless it is a disorder and it is the most common disorder so it's a tremor this oscillations the primarily seen in the upper limb 95% of cases involved the upper limb it is present if somebody holds their harm out steadily or if they're reaching to a target but it's not seen if a person's relaxed that complete puts their hand in the lap but have with rest tremor seen in parkinson's disease and it's not intention tremor seen with uh you know characteristic uh of of cerebellar damage where you have this uh don't have it during postural hold and you see it grow and grow and grow during a reach as one approaches a target instead you see it during posture and you see it during movement but about equal amplitude can also affect the vocal cord so as someone speaking they have a shaky voice chances are that's a central tremor not associated with Parkinson's disease becomes apparent around mid midlife it's progressive has a strong genetic component 50% inheritance for those individuals that have been identified for ET, they'll have a kid with ET. Last thing is that it is not known for sure what is the cause, but the best bet, the consensus view, is cerebellum, which is interesting because it's not ataxia, it's not discoordination in that way, and it's not intention tremor. But it seems to involve basal cerebellum, but, you know, there's a lot of dysfunctions that you get from, you know, such a large, complex circuit. So anyway, that is essential treatment. All right, we've reached the end. Let us summarize. The cerebellum is composed of a cortical sheet of internal nuclei. It processes information from the spinal cord, brainstem, and cerebral cortex. The functional divisions are defined by cortical territory, output nuclei, and capabilities. Its information processing involves mossy fibers, climbing fibers, granule cells, burgundy cells, and deep cerebellar nuclei. The cerebellum is essential for coordination, and dysfunction is manifest as ataxia. As always, I hope that was a clear presentation of what our undoubtedly some complex facts and concepts. Feedback is appreciated.