Welcome students to the Pharmacology of the Sympathomimetics Part 1. This lecture will describe the direct acting Sympathomimetics, those drugs that act directly on adrenergic receptors. Dr. Goldstein speaking. Please contact me if you'd like to chat about pharmacology, talk about the practice questions. I'm available by appointment. Just send me an email please. Here are the learning objectives. I think you're used to looking at them now and you appreciate that the content is reflected by these learning objectives as will the questions be. Preparation materials and links and key points. Knowledge of the physiology of the autonomic nervous system is essential, as I'm sure you've realized, because the core concepts of sympasomimatic pharmacology are built on knowledge of the physiologic actions, reflex regulatory responses of the autonomic nervous system. And it's important that you become familiar with the actual actions, the mechanisms, and actions signaling responses of activating receptors or blocking them. I'm not going to read you the key points. They're here to summarize everything that we'll be talking about. You must know the terms, as always, the language of medicine, the language of pharmacology. Going forward now, various receptor types and their G-protein -coupled receptor actions. You can see they're all G-protein -coupled receptors. Please make sure you understand the effects of activating these various types of receptors. And sympathetic responses are summarized here with some cardiovascular terminology that you really must understand. I know you haven't had cardiology lectures yet, vascular lectures yet. I'm just giving you very straightforward actions, not all complicated things. You need to know about heart rate and ****** volume, cardiac output. I'll go over those. You need to understand about the resistance in the vessel's peripheral resistance, total peripheral resistance. You need to know about mean pressure, mean arterial pressure, about preload and afterload. So if you don't understand it from this lecture, please do look it up. Systolic blood pressure, diastolic blood pressure. I'm sure you're familiar with blood pressure cuff and taking blood pressures showing systolic and diastolic blood pressure. And here are a couple of other terms, pulse pressure and baroreceptors. baroreceptors, are the signaling of reflex responses. And here's reflex responses and changes to blood pressure. Slow heart rate, bradycardia. Fast heart rate, tachycardia. And renin. I put the pronunciation here for you. Renin as in renal because renin is secreted from specialized cells in the kidney. Just a very quick brief and simple review to show to remind you about the sympathetic nervous system and actions. Sympathetic nervous system ganglia are located paraspinally and they have these long postganglionic neurons to the effector cells. The adrenergic neurotransmitters, by and large, is norepinephrine, and epinephrine, which comes out of the adrenal medulla, is a hormone that acts on the adrenergic receptors. the adrenal medulla is part of the sympathetic nervous system but it has a nicotinic receptor so the neurotransmitter there is acetylcholine the sweat glands are also part of the sympathetic nervous system but have cholinergic muscarinic receptors that activate them i'm not going to go over this line by line. I've labeled the receptors and which receptors are expressed on these various tissues. I take you down here to really, this is the takeaway. The pattern. Stimulation of alpha-1 receptors on smooth muscle causes contraction. Alpha -1 contraction. Stimulation of beta-2 receptors on smooth muscle causes relaxation, beta 2 relaxation. Those are the takeaways. With this whole chart, I think you will see the pattern. Vasculature with alpha 1 activation, constriction. Vasculature with beta 2 activation, relaxation. And so too for smooth muscle on other types of organ systems. The heart is regulated through sympathetic and parasympathetic. Parasympathetic is here, so PNS, via M2 receptors, which slows heart, slows AV conduction. On the other side, beta -2 receptors, I'm sorry, beta-1 receptors, beta-1 receptors in the SA node and AV node will increase heart rate and increase conduction. And on the heart muscle itself that increases contraction. So I put this down here in this box so you can see what happens when the beta-1 receptors are stimulated in the heart. A number of different things as you can see but basically the heart is working harder and as the heart beats faster and squeezes with more force it forces more blood into the vessels, into the aorta, in a shorter amount of time than the resting heart does. And innervation of blood vessels here. The takeaways I put in the box here. Stimulation of alpha-1 receptors on vascular smooth muscle induces vasoconstriction. It is the alpha-1 receptors that are the predominant types of adrenergic receptors on blood vessels. Stimulation of postsynaptic alpha 2 receptors on blood vessels can induce vasoconstriction. Also they're not nearly as numerous but they are present and that is the one thing that seems a little confusing. We know that alpha-2 adrenergic receptors are the G -inhibitory type of protein-coupled receptors. But located postsynaptically on vessels, they will cause constriction, and this is through a side mechanism. And stimulation of beta-2 receptors on the skeletal muscle, as I said before, causes smooth muscle relaxation. Here we have the adrenal medulla with epinephrine and norepinephrine being secreted into the bloodstream when activated by the sympathetic nervous system. Normally there is a much greater amount of epinephrine that is secreted into the bloodstream. And this you can just have a look at this figure that This is the point I want to make. This is the takeaway. And I've set out here the factors that regulate cardiac output. As I mentioned before, when the heart is stimulated by the sympathetic nervous system, the heart rate speeds up, the conduction speeds up, the force of contraction is stronger and as a result more blood will be pushed out of the left ventricle into the aorta in a shorter amount of time. And that's the cardiac output. How much blood is pushed out in a given amount of time. So clearly that's going to be related to heart rate and it will also be related to ****** volume, ****** volume. So how much blood is in the ventricle and the heart rate. And I've said it all out here. Preload and afterload are terms that you're going to learn about. Afterload to help you is just the pressure that the blood being pushed out of the ventricles is encountering in the blood vessels. So as the blood is pushed out of the ventricle, if the vessels are all contracted, there will be a stronger pressure to push against than when the vessels are less contracted. Then the afterload will be lower. So high total peripheral volume, pushing against that pressure, there will be a higher afterload than when pushing against a lower pressure in the vessels. So let's talk about the drugs now. I will take time to explain all of these things so that you can just follow along with me and hopefully it will help you to understand this somewhat complex activities of the Sympathomimetics. I have the synthesis, well I have them all listed here on the side with the synthetic mechanisms. and it's all related to each other. Tyrosine is a precursor. It's used to form DOPA, which you may have heard of. DOPA forms dopamine, and let's take a look at what's happening here. Here we have a carboxyl group, here we have none. So this is an aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase enzyme. It just takes that carboxyl group off and that forms dopamine. Now what are we doing here? We are adding a hydroxyl group and that forms norepinephrine. And here we are adding a methyl group and that forms epinephrine. And so on. Here are the various drugs in this little flow chart. I've put a couple of labels on here. The adrenergic agonists, that's basically what they all are. They're activating the adrenergic nervous system. The direct acting ones are, as you would expect, bind to the receptor and activate the signaling cascade. We have several of them here, several of them here. The selective ones, meaning they selectively bind to particular adrenergic receptors, and the non-selective obviously bind more than one type of adrenergic receptor. taking you over here to the right hand side now the indirect acting don't directly bind the adrenergic receptors but they cause a release and increased concentrations of norepinephrine in the synapse and norepinephrine will now do the action so that's the indirect part and now mixed acting is has both direct and indirect actions so that's how the adrenergic agonists are categorized. Let's take a look now at the structure activity relationship and I think you can see just even looking at this chart on the left hand side that the structures are all so similar to each other which one would expect because they all have to fit into the adrenergic receptors, and there is a flow to it. So let's take a look at the initial product, the initial compounds. This is called phenyl ethylamine. Phenyl ethylamine. This is called catechol. So these are catechol amines, dopamine, norepinephrine, and epinephrine. We'll go to dopamine first because that's really the next one in the synthetic flow. So what happens here? We have our phenylethylamine and the catechol stuck onto it. Simple, simple. Then norepinephrine was next, after dopamine, with the appropriate enzyme, as this hydroxyl group is put on, and so forth. So looking at epinephrine now, we have this methyl substitution on the norepinephrine, and what does that do? Okay, structure, where's the activity? that enhances the beta-2 activity. The methyl group enhances the beta-2 activity. So we see with isoproteranol, which is a drug, it doesn't occur naturally in the body, there are now two methyl groups. One, two. And that enhances the beta adrenergic receptor activity on both beta-1 and beta-2. And it has really no clinically significant activity at the alpha receptors. Methyl beta. Methyl beta. Now looking at phenylephrine, phenylephrine is missing this hydroxyl group, so how does that change the structure? So this is basically epinephrine without this hydroxyl group. So we have resistance to metabolism by catechol-O -methyltransferase, catechol -O-methyltransferase, you're going to get a methyl group, and that will inactivate catecholamines, I should say here. so the phenylephrine is resistant to COMT it doesn't have that location where the methyl group goes and it just so happens because it's got this hydroxyl group and it has complete alpha-1 adrenergic receptor selectivity with very low beta affinity even though it's got this muscle group on here. And next, these two on the bottom, ephedrine and amphetamine are indirect acting. Well, ephedrine is the mixed acting and amphetamine is an indirect acting. They have this methyl substitution here, this alpha carbon, and that's going to increase the lipophilicity. So what does that say? Increase CNS activity. Also increased oral bioavailability. And the methyl substitution at the alpha carbon gives resistance to monoamine oxidase. Monoamine, these are all monoamines, monoamine oxidase inactivates the catecholamines. But now amphetamine and ephedrine are not inactivated by MAO because of that methyl group. Plus, now this accounts for the action, these two drugs displace norepinephrine from storage sites. Then the norepinephrine gets pushed into the synapse and norepinephrine does the work. I never ask you to write out structures. What you need to know for me is what does it mean? What does the structure mean for the activity? Keep it simple. Alright, this is a chart of the direct acting sympathomimetics in terms of their therapeutic actions, the therapeutic uses I should say. So we have vasopressors, vaso means vasculature or vessels, vasculature, and pressor means pressing. So these cause vasoconstriction, which increases blood pressure, vasopressor, sometimes just called pressors. And inotropes, so inotrope is the force of contraction of the heart muscle, the myocardium. These drugs are inotropes. They increase the myocardial force of contraction. Bronchodilators, I'm sure you recognize what that is. They cause dilation of the bronchial smooth muscle, relaxation of the bronchial smooth muscle, dilation of the bronchi. So what receptor is that? This is a little review. We talked about it in a previous lecture. Beta-2. Beta-2 relaxation of smooth muscle, even if you didn't know, thinking about relaxation of smooth muscle should take you right to the beta-2 receptors. Mirabegrin and Bibegrin. This is beta-3. And then the alpha-2 agonists that we'll talk about are clonidine and methyl dopa. So let's talk first about the vasopressors. These are powerful drugs that raise blood pressure. They raise the mean arterial pressure by inducing vasoconstriction. Vasoconstriction, alpha, alpha-1 especially. Vasopressors are used in the treatment of shock, which is a life-threatening hypotension that can lead to a circulatory failure, and it is a medical emergency. So epinephrine, norepinephrine, dopamine, phenylephrine are, for emergency situations, hypotension. How are they different? Well, it's their relative affinities for the adrenergic receptors that make them different. We'll start with epinephrine. It is a potent stimulator of all alpha types and all beta types. The relative affinities are beta 1 and beta 2 greater than alpha 1 and alpha 2. That said, don't forget that it's still a potent stimulant of the alpha receptors as well as the beta. But it will preferentially bind the beta receptors. And this is all, as with so many drugs, dose-dependent effects. Well, to understand epinephrine, the pharmacologic epinephrine effects, we need to really understand epinephrine physiologic effects. So I'm going to take you through that now in the fight or flight response. So this is when the person is in a situation of really an emergency to get out or to fight, the adrenal medulla will be signaled and will secrete epinephrine. And don't forget, all natural actions are regulated. So it will secrete epinephrine as needed in the concentration that is needed for the situation at hand. So when this happens, especially at this high fight-or-flight response level, epinephrine is traveling through the bloodstream, stimulating the beta-1 receptors, and what happens then? Increased heart rate, increased strength of contraction, and that's going to increase the ****** volume and increase the cardiac output. And the coronary blood flow is also going to increase because after all the heart is a muscle that needs to be fed by blood. And it can actually lead to arrhythmia with all of this increase in activity in the heart. Well, in fight or flight, the person needs to be able to take in great breaths, great amounts of air. So that's beta 2 on the respiratory system, bronchodilation. Blood pressure increases. Usually the diastolic pressure decreases, and I'll go through why that happens. And the mean arterial pressure only slightly changes. might even decrease. I'll go through why that happens. And there's an increase in the mean pulmonary pressure. That's a vascular effect. Peripheral circulation, I'll take you down here now. Because SBP is increasing and diastolic pressure is decreasing. That's where this comes in and that's where there may be an unchanged total peripheral resistance or it might even be a little lower. There's going to be a little increase in cerebral blood flow. More blood is coming that way. Definitely an increase in skeletal muscle blood flow and that's because of vasodilation by activation of the beta 2 receptors. When a person's in a fight -or-flight response, skeletal muscles need to be fed with blood and nutrients. The beta-2s are not anywhere else. They're only in the skeletal muscle. So in other areas of blood flow, the skin, the splanchnic vessels, the kidneys, the visceral, the viscera, there are only alphas. So think about how this is happening. There's vasoconstriction there, but vasodilation in the skeletal muscle, so the blood is going to be shunted towards the skeletal muscle, where it's really needed at this moment. It's not so much needed in the skin or in the mesentery. increased oxygen consumption the person is working hard needs more needs and that oxygen is being consumed blood glucose goes up also lactic acid goes up and plasma potassium goes down i'm not going to go through those mechanisms and i'm not asking you to remember them for this lecture. You'll learn about them later. In the CNS, there's increased respiration, so increased oxygen consumption, and increased, so the patient is feeling things, subjective sensations, feeling anxiety, feeling alarm, and the immune system is also affected. There are various immunomodulatory actions that I'm also not going to go through in this lecture. I will be concentrating on the cardio, vascular, and pulmonary effects. So let's talk about the drug now. We'll overlay epinephrine pharmacologic actions on to the physiologic actions. Once you know the physiology, you'll know the pharmacology. So there are dose-dependent effects in the vasculature. When we're talking about dose, epinephrine is given in, experimentally anyway, and occasionally in humans at a continuous infusion. So the drug is just going in, going in, going in. At this point I would like to say therapeutically I am as much preferred. We'll talk about that later. But for the sake of understanding epinephrine's cardiovascular effects, we'll talk about it in this dose -dependent fashion. So low doses. So a very low amount of epinephrine going in per minute, being by continuous infusion. it's going to act preferentially on beta 2 receptors in the skeletal muscle so what what will that cause vasodilation in the skeletal muscle vascular beds and what will that cause a decrease in the total peripheral resistance because the the blood pressure comes from the pressure of the blood pressing against the vasculature. So when the vessels are dilated, there's going to be less pressure against the vessels, so the blood pressure is lower. When the vessels are constricted, there's more pressure of that blood against the vessels, so the pressure will be higher. So what we're talking about here with the vasodilation and the skeletal muscle vascular beds is a decrease in the total peripheral resistance and also a decrease in diastolic blood pressure just like we see with natural epinephrine. What's happening on the alpha side? Well the beta 2s are only in the skeletal muscle vasculature but the blood is everywhere so there's vasoconstriction and all the other areas just like natural epinephrine. So the blood is being shunted from these other areas to the skeletal muscle vascular beds. Now high dose epinephrine and I'm skipping through the medium dose causes vasoconstriction alpha vasoconstrictive alpha effects predominantly high dose so you get this profound increase in mean arterial pressure profound vasoconstriction and it's dangerous okay what's happening in the heart increased heart rate so that's called a chronotropic effect positive chronotropic effect Increased conduction velocity, that's what we expect. Increased strength in ventricular contraction, and that's called inotropy, positive inotropic action. And an increase in ventricular work per beat, meaning that it's using more oxygen. And as the muscle uses more oxygen, it needs to be supplied by the coronary vessels. So people who have coronary artery disease in which their vessels are either occluded or partially occluded, by increasing that oxygen demand can cause an ischemic attack in these patients. Okay, so we talked about low dose, the beta-2 mediated enhanced blood flow. I have this chart on the right hand side. Epinephrine is administered at this point where the arrow is located. And that will cause an increase in systolic blood pressure, but it will cause a decrease in diastolic blood pressure. And so there's very little change in the mean arterial pressure, a little bit of a decrease in this sketch. But let's look at the heart now. So this is beta 1. This is beta 2 down here. And this is alpha 1 up here. Oh, beta-1, what am I doing, beta-1 because we're getting that increase in cardiac output. And also remember that blood is shunting, is being shunted towards the skeletal muscle. So the heart, that's mainly beta-1 by far. Well, the heart rate is going to increase as those beta receptors get stimulated. And also the cardiac muscle is going to be pumping harder. So to recap, beta 2 mediated enhanced blood flow to skeletal muscles will decrease the peripheral resistance and decrease diastolic blood pressure. Beta-1, increased heart rate, increased force of contraction. So, of course, those two together will increase heart rate and increased ****** volume, coming from an increased force of contraction, will increase cardiac output and, of course, increase cardiac oxygen demand. And the mean arterial blood pressure is usually not greatly elevated because of this difference in dilation of the skeletal muscle vasculature versus the non-skeletal muscle vasculature. Intermediate rate. Well, it's going to get more alpha. Basically, that's what it's talking about, and that can cause an increase in blood pressure, which can stimulate the compensatory reflexes in order to push down, in order to decrease heart rate. and why would the heart rate be decreased in this compensatory reflex in order to reduce the ****** volume and reduce the cardiac output so that that will have less effect on the blood pressure now rapid intravenous infusion i mentioned it before and it can be mentioned many many times before, later it is that important. Predominantly the alpha effects now, so blood pressure is going to go up, diastolic blood pressure is going to go up, mean arterial pressure is going to go up, we have this pressor effect. And we'll get this reflex homeostatic adjustments, meaning the parasympathetic system is triggered to send a message down to the heart to decrease the heart rate. Pharmacokinetics. Usually I put this first, but I wanted to connect the mechanism of action of epinephrine pharmacology to epinephrine physiology. So let's talk about the pharmacokinetics now. IM, this is preferred, preferred method of administration. Sub-Q can be, it can be used subcutaneously, it can be used IV if necessary, it can be put into the bone intraosseous if necessary. An alternative to the IM for emergent use, people carry it around in their pockets, in their bags is intranasal spray which I have a picture down here and it can also be given ****** by oral inhalation and what's for inhaled where is it going to go the lungs so beta 2 bronchodilation makes sense doesn't it I will reiterate yet again IV and IO root only if immediate reliable effect is required because it as in profound hypotension or cardiopulmonary arrest. This is a catecholamine, it is polar, it's not absorbed from the GI tract. They do not cross the blood-brain barrier. So how are they degraded? Monoamine oxidase and catecholomethyltransferase in many many tissues but there's a high concentration of these enzymes in the liver. Metabolites, small amount of the unchanged drug goes excreted in the urine, not much because of the efficient metabolic process. High levels of epinephrine, norepinephrine and metabolites in the blood and urine are indicative of this tumor, which is an adrenal tumor called pheochromocytoma and we'll be talking more about that in the next lecture. Not part two but in the in the adrenergic antagonists. So okay great we have an emergent situation. How fast are these drugs going to act by these various routes. I am very rapidly. It comes in an auto -injector. People can inject themselves. Bystanders can inject it easily and it works very rapidly. Subcutaneously, it's going to take several minutes. Intranasal spray, very easy to use. Anybody can use that easily, and it will take about a minute to achieve an onset. IV, of course, it's immediate, but only people who are experienced with the use of intravenous epinephrine should administer it that way, and it should be in an area where there is support in case it's needed all right what do we use it for well whenever you see a drug of choice make sure to file that away in your brain i am an intranasal spray without delay for anaphylactic shock reversal so when a person is having an allergic reaction a severe allergic reaction they can have rapid hypotension. Their throats can swell up and they'll have difficulty breathing. The bronchi will constrict and the person can die really in a matter of minutes. So this is why epinephrine should be used without delay. And epinephrine is the drug of choice, never contraindicated when we're treating anaphylaxis. So why? Why would this be the drug of choice? Because, one, rapid action. Two, it will open the airways. Three, it has the beta-2 action. But more importantly, it has the alpha-1 constricting effect that will bring up the blood pressure at the dose that it is given I am. And that will be the predominant effect. So those are the main reasons and it will have an effect on the immune system too, but as I said I'm not going to go into that. Well adverse effects. Think about fight or flight if you want to. It might help. Restlessness, apprehension, just the fear that something's going to happen. Throbbing headache, tremor, the arms and the hands and arms and legs are shaking. The heart is beating like mad. ********* ventricular contractions can occur with this with pharmacologic epinephrine. Patient has to be observed for that when it's given IV particularly. Arrhythmias, angina in patients who have coronary artery disease, cerebral hemorrhage because there's going to be this sharp increase in blood pressure. Continuous use, well sometimes it has to be used continuously when a person is in severe shock and the continuous use can lead to severe hypertension and cardiac complications. It only makes sense. Adverse effects include sympathetic stimulation. Well, that's its job, but it's also an adverse effect. And extravasation, meaning the drug can leak out of the infusion site because we poke a hole in that vessel to get the drug in and it can leak out and and that can cause severe constriction of the local blood vessels that can prevent nutrients and oxygen getting to the tissues, causing tissue necrosis. Let's check our knowledge on this one. I invite you to pause your computer and think about this for a minute. it. Where is Epi synthesized and secreted from in the periphery? That's what we're talking about right now. What are Epi's relative affinities for the adrenergic receptor types? And what are the effects of physiologic epinephrine on blood pressure, chronotropy, inotropy, and peripheral vascular resistance? It is synthesized in the adrenal medulla from norepinephrine. So norepinephrine has to be present there. Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase converts norepinephrine to epinephrine and I gave you a little structure here on the right-hand side so you can visualize it. It's the N -methyltransferase which is present obviously in the adrenal medulla. If PNMT is not present, then norepinephrine is not going to convert to epinephrine, such as in the synapses, in the nerve synapses. What are epinephrine's relative affinities? Well, beta 1 and beta 2 equal affinity, greater affinity than alpha 1 and alpha 2, strong for all of them, but it will have a preferential effect on beta 1 and beta 2. and that's where their predominant effect will be unless there's a high dose epinephrine. And the effects, increased chronotropy, increased sinotropy, rise in cardiac output, increased systolic blood pressure, vasodilation in skeletal muscle beds, decreased peripheral resistance and decreased diastolic blood pressure, Mean arterial pressure is not usually greatly elevated, usually flat or lower. But that's dose dependent. If it's a high dose, mean arterial pressure will go up and that will stimulate the reflex actions to reverse heart rate. But lower dose, no. Increased heart rate, increased ****** volume, increased cardiac output, constriction of veins. And as the veins constrict, that's going to push the blood back to the heart. So, increased venous return to the heart. And that, in turn, is going to increase ****** volume and cardiac output. Makes sense, right? Each one follows on the other. Epi in high dose or continuous infusion causes vasoconstriction and increased total peripheral resistance. The epinephrine is the drug of choice for what condition and why? Anaphylaxis, anaphylactic shock, which is hypotension due to widespread vasodilation and vascular leakage leading to reduce flow to organs and organ failure. Why is it the drug of choice? Because it works fast, prevents progression of symptoms, causes bronchodilation, so opens the airways, causes vasoconstriction, increases the force of contraction, so that's going to increase the blood pressure, and vasoconstriction also reduces allergic angioedema, that's the throat swelling, and hives, and suppresses release of histamine and other mediators from mast cells. It's nice to know. I'm not going to test you specifically on that at this point. But it's sort of thing that you might see in a stem that gives you a hint. So let's talk about norepinephrine now. Potent stimuli of alpha to alpha 1 and alpha 2 and beta 1 adrenergic receptors. So I put it here in comparison to epinephrine, alpha-1, alpha-2, and beta-1. Very little, really no clinical effect on beta-2s. Epinephrine is stronger, though, than norepinephrine on the alphas, just to give you a sense of the potency of epinephrine. Beta-1 epinephrine has a stronger effect on the beta-1s than norepinephrine does, and beta -2 we know it's epinephrine is beta-2 all the way. So if you know what receptors are being activated then you can predict and look for those effects. So is norepinephrine going to cause bronchodilation? No. Is norepinephrine going to cause dilation in the vascular in the skeletal muscle vascular beds? No. So, potent vasopressor. It will activate all of the alphas in the in the vascular system everywhere and that's going to increase total peripheral resistance and therefore the blood coming out of the left ventricle is going to be pushing against that peripheral resistance so So it's going to increase the afterload. So constricting of the veins increases return to the heart because it's pushing the blood back to the heart. And that's going to increase the preload. When more blood comes back into the heart, that increases the preload, pre before heart. And if more blood is coming back in, that's going to increase the ****** volume. One step follows the next. cardiac effects well it does have a powerful effect on beta 1 receptors even though it may not be as great as epinephrine it's still powerful so that will increase cardiac force of contraction on the muscles but it has a modest increase in cardiac output and I'll explain that a little later. And it increases mean arterial pressure naturally because it's increasing. It's causing vasoconstriction all over. And that is going to induce that reflex effect to decrease the heart rate. Parasympathetic signal comes down to the heart. The M2 receptors are stimulated. That decreases the heart rate, decreases the conduction through the AV node, decreases the atrial contractions. Adverse, I should say, decreases the strength of the atrial contractions. Adverse effects are typical of the class. Reduced flow to the organs because everything is vasoconstricted. So that's going to decrease organ perfusion. And what happens when we decrease perfusion? danger of organ failure. Ventricular arrhythmia as we stimulate that heart. Digital ischemia because we're constricting all of those vessels in the in the little fingers and toes. Extravasation at the injection site the same way as we see with any vasopressor. So where is norepinephrine synthesized and secreted from. It is synthesized in presynaptic adrenergic neurons. It's the neurotransmitter from the presynaptic neurons. And it is stored in vesicles in those neurons and it's released into the synapse when it gets a signal down the sympathetic neuron where it will activate the adrenergic receptors in the effector organs. Dopamine is the precursor to norepinephrine. Dopamine beta hydroxylase is the enzyme. I'm not going to ask you these enzymes. Norepinephrine is also synthesized in the adrenal medulla and secreted into the bloodstream normally in small amounts. And the relative affinities are alpha 1 and alpha 2 are equal to each other, greater than beta 1 affinity, although still potent, and the beta 2 activity is very, very low. And the effects? Vasoconstriction all over. Global vasoconstriction increases total peripheral resistance increases systolic blood pressure, increases diastolic blood pressure, increased force of contraction of the heart muscle, that's inotropy, increased ****** volume with a modest increase in cardiac output. An increase in mean arterial pressure because of the vagal, the compensatory vagal reflex overcomes the direct stimulation of heart rate. So that is the explanation of why there's only a modest increase in cardiac output. It's because of the reflex vagal, the vagal reflex that slows the heart rate. So as the norepinephrine is put into the vein, it travels to the heart, it causes that initial thump, thump, thump, thump, but then as it increases the total peripheral resistance and mean arterial pressure, the parasympathetic nervous system is signaled to lower the heart rate. So what do we use it for? Shock. Really, it's preferred for most types of shock. And why? Why is it a drug of choice? And we should always know that. The answer is evidence. Clinical experience of norepinephrine's effectiveness in the treatment of shock. Potent vasoconstriction increases systemic vascular resistance and raises blood pressure. Mild increase in cardiac output compared to a pure alpha -1 agonist like phenylephrine. Lower risk of arrhythmias compared to dopamine and dobutamine. And vasopressors are components of a broader treatment plan. Of course, we're not using them by themselves. So you may notice on here that epinephrine is missing. We don't normally, normally doesn't mean ever, never. Normally we don't use epinephrine in the treatment of shock because of the value of norepinephrine. Dopamine now, yes dopamine peripherally. We're talking about dopamine. Dopamine normally is secreted, is synthesized in specialized renal cells and secreted, and it has particular actions in the peripheral system. It will act on D1, well at least in terms of the drug, we're thinking about action on D1, alpha-1, and beta-1 receptors. So what are the relative affinities? Dopamine, of course it has a strong affinity for dopamine receptors, but it also has some affinity for beta -1 receptors and alpha-1 receptors. You may have noticed the similarities in their structures. Alpha-1 epinephrine is the most potent, norepinephrine is very potent, and dopamine less so. So this effect is going to be dose dependent. How much of that dopamine is in the vasculature and getting to the alpha-1 receptors. Epinephrine has more has a stronger affinity for the beta ones although they're both potent and norep and dopamine actually has equal affinity to norepinephrine for the beta ones. And beta 2, dopamine basically really has no clinical effect. Dose dependent, I keep talking about dose dependent effects. So these are the hemodynamic effects. I've given you this chart to kind of remind you about fundamental pharmacokinetics. This is drug concentration. This is effect. So this is the lowest. This is the highest concentration of dopamine in the blood in micrograms per milliliter. This is a continuous infusion. At low dose, the dopamine 1 activation, because it does strong affinity for dopamine 1, in the renal and mesenteric vessels, that's where the dopamine 1 receptors are located, will cause vasodilation. vasodilation. So that will increase renal blood flow and an increase in the amount of blood flowing into the glomerulus is going to increase the glomerular filtration rate and the activation of D1 also causes increased sodium excretion. So as the vessels in the renal and mesentery dilate, that's going to be a decrease in the peripheral vascular resistance. See how that flows? Well, what could that be useful for? Well, we don't use low-dose dopamine for its hemodynamic effects. So intermediate dosing. It's a little bit higher dose. Beta-1 activation now, So we're getting the dopamine plus the beta 1. And what's that going to do? Increased heart rate, increased strength of contraction, positive inotropic effects. So there will be an increase in systolic blood pressure as the heart is beating faster and pushing more out. and total peripheral resistance is usually unchanged because we have this balance now between the effects on the heart and this vasodilatory effects of activation of D1. But high dose, I have that right here, we get the alpha-1 activation now. So there's going to be a vascular constriction generally throughout the body and that will have the presser effect, dose-dependent effects. Now, one may say, okay, what a great idea. We can use that shock because the kidneys will be spared. And studies have been done to examine that hypothesis. But dopamine was associated with higher mortality and dysrhythmias were more common. And this is from a subgroup analysis from a randomized clinical trial. Dopamine does not appear to provide any renal protective advantage over routine therapy with IV diuretics. So no, the evidence demonstrates that really it doesn't have the benefit that was expected. it. So let's talk about phenylephrine now. It's an alpha-1 selective vasopressor. It is not a catecholamine because it's missing that hydroxyl group on the phenyl group, on the phenyl ring. I put the pharmacokinetics here in the front. They're very simple. It is given ******. It doesn't have really very much effect at the doses that it's given. IV IM subcutaneously intranasally. Intranasal is just for stuffy nose. IV IM sub Q obviously this would be for systemic and it can also be put into the eye drops and this is for red eyes. So looking at each of these routes of administration should tell you what it's being used for. Metabolism in the liver, in the gut wall, monoamine oxidase, sulfation, glucuronidation. Oral bioavailability is Okay, not great. Half-life, IV, pretty short half-life, 15 minutes. IM or sub-Q, it takes a little longer to get into the bloodstream, so it takes a little longer to get out. And when we put it into the I, well, it's not going to be metabolized that quickly, so it lasts a bit longer. What's it do? Well, it's pure alpha -1. What does that tell you? Potent vasoconstriction, and potent vasoconstriction all over the body is going to increase peripheral resistance, increase systolic blood pressure, increase diastolic blood pressure. And so as the pressure goes up, the mean arterial pressure goes up, that triggers the reflex effect to lower the heart rate, and that may decrease the ****** volume. It depends. Everything is dose dependent. So what is it? It's a vasopressor. That's what we use it for. IV. For the treatment of hypotension. When? Well we know it's not first line because that's norepinephrine. So it's an alternative in patients who cannot take norepinephrine or who have failed other therapies. Nasal congestion. That's when we're putting it in the nose and it's also ****** in OTC cough and cold products, but it doesn't work too well as a nasal decongestant for that. It can be sprayed into the nose, intranasal, and that works nicely. It causes vasoconstriction in the vessels of the mucous membranes in the nose, and that will cause them to shrink, making more room within that little nasal space within the nares, and therefore breathing is easier and but if it's used for a long term, long term can be two or three days, continuously when it is removed from the receptors it can cause rebound congestion that can be quite strong. And red eyes, it has the same effect in the eyes. It causes vasoconstriction which takes the red out of the eyes. It can be used as eye drops by the ophthalmologist to cause medriasis. Alpha-1 effect can be used as a hemostat because it's obviously it's going to stop some local bleeding. And it's actually in hemorrhoid products for the same reason to cause a local vasoconstriction and shrink the size of those vessels. What are the dose -dependent effects of intravenous dopamine infusion on blood pressure, chronotropy, inotropy, peripheral vascular resistance? What are the effects of intravenous phenylephrine infusion on blood pressure, chronotropy, inotropy, and peripheral vascular resistance? And what are the clinical indications for dopamine and phenylephrine. Okay. With regard to dopamine infusion, low-dose D1 activation in the renal and mesoteric vessels, which is where the D1s are expressed, will cause vasodilation, increase renal blood flow, GFR, and will increase sodium excretion and decrease peripheral vascular resistance. Try and see this as a large effect. Imagine it as a large effect that's happening because of the vasodilating effect. Except for the sodium excretion, that's a second action that it does. Intermediate doses, we have our beta -1s now. What happens when we stimulate the beta-1 receptors in the heart. Increased heart rate, increased AV conduction, increased force of contraction, and it just so happens it causes norepinephrine release from the nerve terminals, an indirect effect that I forgot to mention earlier. In any case, we're increasing the systolic blood pressure because we're increasing the cardiac output. The diastolic pressure may be the same because of the vasodilatory effect in the mesentery and kidneys, or it could be slightly increased. What are the effects of phenylephrine infusion? Generalized vasoconstriction. Alpha, pure one, alpha one. That's it. And the indications for use, alternatives to norepinephrine for severe hypotension. So this is going to be patient specific decision. And phenylephrine topically will reduce congestion by causing local vasoconstriction. Let's talk now about isoproteranol and dobutamine. These are positive inotropes now. What are we looking at? We're looking at the force of cardiomyocyte contraction. So let's talk about these drugs. Isopraterinol first. So what do you notice about the mechanism of activity. Relative affinities. Potent non-selective beta adrenergic receptor agonist with activity at beta 1, beta 2, and beta 3, but that's it. Only beta. I should put the structure here. You may remember that it's like epinephrine but It was two methyl groups on the nitrogen. The beta-1 activity of isoproteranol is even stronger than epinephrine and norepinephrine and dopamine. The beta-2 activity is also stronger than that of epinephrine and the others. Well, the others have very little beta-2 action. So what would we use it for? Well, it's got heart action, clearly. So positive chronotropic and inotropic actions, heart rate, and force of contraction. That's going to increase cardiac output and increase oxygen consumption. Hence, it's categorization as an inotrope. Beta-2 action, of course, it'll cause bronchial smooth muscle and GI smooth muscle relaxation. Back in the day, before albuterol was developed, isoproteranol was used by inhalation to open the bronchi of people with asthma. What's happening now when we do activate those beta-2 receptors along with the beta-1s, decreased peripheral vascular resistance, decreased diastolic pressure, systolic pressure may be unchanged or rise, and this is because of the balancing effect, and a decreased mean arterial pressure. We'll look at a chart, and you'll be able to see what we're talking about here. It really has limited therapeutic use nowadays. It's important to understand the mechanisms because it'll help you understand the sympathetic nervous system effects. But it is still used for hypotension that results from bradycardia. Makes sense. The drug does increase the heart rate. Reflex tachycardia can occur. So look at decrease in mean arterial pressure. What will the reflex be? The reflex is to help get that pressure up by increasing heart rate. So reflex tachycardia will occur. And when we have an increase in oxygen consumption, we have to be thinking about people with coronary artery disease, cardiac ischemia, and that increase in the inotropic action can lead to arrhythmias. Dobutamine now is used more frequently as an inotrope. It is a so -called selective beta-1 agonist. It comes in a racemic mixture, which means it's got this particular drug. It has four enantiomeric forms. Potency of the positive isomer on the beta adrenergic receptors is much greater than that of the negative isomer. and the alpha adrenergic effects offset each other so that what happens is basically the drug becomes a so -called selective beta 1 receptor agonist. How does this work? The negative isomer is a potent alpha 1 receptor agonist. So marked vasoconstrictor effects. The positive isomer is an alpha 1 receptor antagonist and it is believed that this action of the antagonist effect offsets the vasoconstrictor effect. The positive isomer is also a potent beta 1 receptor agonist and it also has mild action on beta-2 adrenergic receptors. So we're going to get a strong beta-1 response and somewhat of a beta-2 action with the use of dobutamine. And of course, again, as always, dose-dependent effect. So let's take a look now at these net effects. Dobutamine, as I said, predominantly beta 1 receptor agonist mild beta 2 so it causes an increase in cardiac contractility increase in heart rate that's going to increase cardiac output which is the point of an inotrope get that heart squeezing the blood out increasing that cardiac output Beta-2 activating effects may be slightly greater than its alpha-1 stimulating effects, so that can result in some vasodilation. This is all about balance and predominant effects. So what's the advantage of dobutamine? And we're comparing this to the other inotrope, isoprotirinol, for cardiac output with increased relative, let me just start over, increased cardiac output with only a little increase in heart rate, and there will be less reflex tachycardia because the mean arterial pressure is not taking a drop. So, summary of the effect. Increased cardiac output, decreased systemic vascular resistance, decreased central venous pressure, you don't have to worry about that one, decreased pulmonary wedge pressure, these are preload things, you don't have to worry about that for now, you will need to know it eventually, and improved renal blood flow. Low doses, dobutamine relieves signs and symptoms of congestive heart failure. so what's the use for cardiac decompensation so when that heart just starts to fail due to cardiac surgery due to heart congestive heart failure due to acute mi it's only let me put quite a few lines under this short-term treatment well why is that because of tachyphylaxis with this drug. Remember its major effects is on the beta receptors which are known to respond with the with those desensitizing mechanisms, down-regulation of the receptors, desensitization of the receptors. When do we see this? 24 to 72 hours of continuous use. So what are we talking? One day to three days. That's not a long time. Dose-dependent rise in systolic blood pressure and heart rate, hypertension, tachycardia, angina, arrhythmia, so these are all potential adverse effects. Of course the patient is going to be hospitalized and monitored closely. All right what else could we use dobutamine for then? Stress testing in patients who can't do an exercise stress test. Give dobutamine, increase that heart rate, check it out with an echocardiogram. So what is the major thing we think about? Evidence. How well does the drug work based on good randomized controlled trials? Long -term dobutamine is associated with decreased survival. So this is a stopgap measure. Okay, let's see how you can work through this problem I'm going to give you. We're going to compare the cardiovascular effects of norepinephrine, epinephrine, and isoproterenol. Norepinephrine, epinephrine, isoproterenol. So we'll go in the order that we actually looked at them in this lecture. So we'll start with epinephrine first. and we remember that epinephrine is right so the betas are it has more potency on the betas than on the alphas but it's got very strong activity on all of them so we're using 10 micrograms per milliliter per minute sorry which is a relatively low dose so we can see the effects on all of these different receptors. So activation of the beta-1 receptors is going to increase the heart rate, here epinephrine is administered here, heart rate goes up. And the systolic blood pressure is going to go up as the heart rate goes up and pushes, increases cardiac output, pushes the blood against the vessels and the systolic blood pressure goes up. But meanwhile, activation of the beta -2 receptors will cause vasodilation in the skeletal muscle vascular beds here. So diastolic pressure will go down, DBP down, SBP up. So the the average here is pretty flat, and as a result, it's not going to stimulate reflex tachycardia. So what else is happening? Peripheral resistance goes down. Not a lot, a little bit. Oops, excuse me. All right, norepinephrine now. Norepinephrine is alphas. It has the greatest affinity for the alpha receptors less affinity for the betas but still strong so we administer the norepinephrine let's say right here causes heart rate it causes the blood pressure to go up that's our alphas causes the diastolic blood pressure to go up again the alphas as we get that generalized basal constriction throughout the body and clearly the peripheral resistance is definitely going to go up which is why we give it for shock oh but what's happening with the heart rate looks down well remember this is beta 1 we put the drug into the vein it's initially going to cause an increase in heart rate, which you don't see here, but then M2 takes over as this increase in mean arterial pressure causes a reflux, I'll put it down here, reflux response. And what is that reflux response? That's the parasympathetic nervous system is activated, and this is the vagus nerve, M2 receptors, decrease heart rate. So that explains why the heart rate, it can be no change or it can be down, decreased, depending on dosing and all of that. So So that explains why norepinephrine graphs look the way they do. So let's go to isoproteranol now. This is beta 1, beta 2, we don't need to think about beta 3 at the moment. So betas, administer the isoproteranol right here, and it's going to increase the heart rate, clearly, there is going to be a little bit of increase possibly in systolic blood pressure because of the increase in the cardiac output pushing into the vessels, but with our beta 2, we're going to get a decrease in diastolic blood pressure, decreased diastolic blood pressure. So the mean arterial pressure goes down, the peripheral resistance goes down, and we get reflex response but what would be the reflex response to a decrease increase heart rate so we get the beta 1 for the heart rate and the reflex response on the heart rate and the heart rate for isopraternol goes up much more than we see with the other two drugs. And what can that lead to? It can lead to arrhythmias. So I hope you see how to think this through by looking at the actions on all of the various receptors and how they work together and what the reflex response might be. So I have comparisons here of the different actions. I'm not going to read them read through them again. And we'll do a little check your knowledge. The chart illustrates the cardiovascular drug X, which activates autonomic receptors. Okay, so let's see what's happening here. This is the control, so that means the starting point was no drug. Systolic blood pressure in this patient goes up a little bit. Sorry, it goes down, right? Decrease systolic blood pressure. Diastolic blood pressure goes down quite a bit. And heart rate goes from 60 to 120. So it doubles, double the heart rate. So, a big increase in heart rate. What's it going to be? Decreased systolic blood pressure, decreased diastolic, not much change in the systolic blood pressure, decreased diastolic blood pressure quite a bit, and a marked increase in the heart rate, which is even at tachycardia. So, which one is it? Well, if it was the alphas, that would be a big increase in blood pressure, systolic and diastolic. If it was alpha 1, alpha 2, and beta 1, so that's norepinephrine, it would be an increase in systolic blood pressure and diastolic blood pressure. Obviously, it's not muscarinic. So that leaves C. It has to be the betas. And here's our summary, which I'm not going to read to you. And here's the check your knowledge questions. And that concludes part one of the Sympasso memetics.