Welcome, students, to the Pharmacology of Sympathomimetics, part two. We will finish up with the Direct Acting Adrenergic Receptor Agonist and then move to the other two subclasses, the Indirect Acting and the Mixed Acting Sympathomimetics. Dr. Goldstein speaking. Please contact me if you'd like to chat about pharmacology. Here are the learning objectives to help you get into the picture of what you should be learning about the sympathomimetics group of drugs. Here are the preparation materials. I highly recommend doing practice questions. It really helps with learning. Here are some links if you'd like to use them and our key points organized according to the learning objectives. So let us begin with our selective beta 2 agonist. This is a widely used group of drugs, very important group. They come short -acting beta agonist or SABAS, S-A -B-A, SABAS, an acronym that has become a word, and the long-acting versions, LABAs. The ultra-long acting versions are once daily compared to twice daily dosing, but I'll just refer to all of them as LABAs. Structure activity relationship. I'm sure you remember about the addition of methyl groups to this point on the phenylethanolamine ring. So we see three methyl groups here and these are selective beta-2 agonists. They are not degraded by monoamine oxidase. I've see there are quite a few. Albuterol, Selmeterol, and Formoterol. Each has very important features. Albuterol is the prototype, is still widely used. Leave albuterol is this enantiomer. Its effect is generally equivalent. There's no difference between them according to the clinical trials. And then salmeterol was the first one in the LABA group, and others came along afterwards. Formotorol has a particular feature that I'll point out, which is why it's starred. Let's take a look at the pharmacokinetics. Oral inhalation is the major, major, major root of administration. The albuterol has other roots of administration before the oral inhalations were developed. LABA's only oral inhalation. There is some absorption from lungs. The dose really is small compared to an oral dose because there's a high concentration that's delivered to the lung tissue, and some of it gets absorbed by swallowing. There's low plasma protein binding. You don't have to be thinking about that. Some hepatic metabolism, whatever, gets around in the circulation to the liver. and the same renal excretion of unchanged drug and metabolites, whatever bit gets absorbed and reaches the kidneys. Sabahs have half-life, four to five hours. It generally has to be used at least once every six hours. And we have product-specific half-lives for the LABAs. 50 hours, you can see, for one of them that has a very long half-life. But the range is anywhere in between these. Albuterol has an onset of, the literature says, around 10 minutes. Some people find the relief beginning much sooner than that. Now, here's what I wanted to point out about for motorol. The long-acting beta agonists tend to have a much longer onset of action than the short-acting ones. We see here 15 to 19 minutes, except for motorol, which has a very quick onset of action, which is unusual for a LABA. So that's the takeaway for motorol, and that's why I put a star on it, so that you really are aware of it, and it is a widely used drug. So the salmeterol for motorol have to be taken twice a day, and the ultralabas once a day. That's the difference between them. The aerosol delivers a drug into the distal airways, as I mentioned before. High concentrations get into the lung tissue. And it can be used in really relatively small doses compared to what would be administered systemically. They act directly on the beta-2 receptors, cause relaxation of the bronchial smooth muscle, and bronchodilation, making breathing easier. around 10 percent actually enters the lungs and the rest of it gets swallowed so why aerosol instead of oral because frankly the aerosol have greater efficacy much quicker onset of action and fewer side effects because the amount of drug that gets absorbed is much lower than that with the oral drugs. So there really is no advantage of the oral over the aerosol forms. I mentioned before they induce relaxation of bronchial smooth muscle, but beta -2 agonists are also expressed in uterine smooth muscle of the pregnant uterus. And I'll get to that in a moment. So why are the long -acting versions long-acting? Because they're highly lipophilic. They are able to deposit in the membrane next to the beta-2 receptors and directly activate the beta-2 receptors over a longer period of time. Also, they are less susceptible to metabolism compared to short-acting versions. I mentioned before that albuterol is not metabolized to any great extent by monoamine oxidase also. Bronchodilation to relieve bronchospasm, obviously. So what patients would be taking this? Patients with asthma, for example. Patients with COPD. these are mainstays for these patients so bronchodilation they may suppress some immune system products leukotrienes and histamines they may enhance mucociliary function and other other features but it's this one that I would like you to remember which is why it's bold these mechanisms may appear on board exams you may see them in practice questions in various board review books glucocorticoids and leukostriene receptor antagonists have better anti -inflammatory effects in asthma so if an anti -inflammatory is needed a glucocorticoid by aerosol, so that would be oral inhalation again, would be preferred and it's frequently used at the mainstay for maintenance in patients with asthma. Okay, I mentioned before about the presence of beta-2 receptors in uterine smooth muscle. of the pregnant individual. So this is a word called tocolytic action or tocolysis. This clinical use is to suppress labor, suppress ********* labor. And of course we don't want to suppress labor a term, we have to remember that beta -2 agonist, not the inhaled version, can't suppress labor at term as well, which would be undesirable. So when would labor be suppressed? It would be ********* labor, as I said. So this, we'll get into that in more detail at a very much later lecture. But keep in mind, this feature of beta-2 receptors being present on the pregnant uterus, particularly in the later stages. So, therapeutic uses. Since we're talking about it, we'll talk about the tocolytic use right now. Remember that beta -2 receptors are the GS type of protein -coupled receptor. they'll activate adenylyl cyclase, increase cyclic AMP, which goes on to the downstream effects, which lead to relaxation of the myometrium. That's the bottom line. So what's the point? To delay birth of this ********* birth by 48 hours. Okay, so why? To administer systemically, by injection, a long-acting glucocorticoid to the mother to promote fetal lung maturation. So that if the child is born prematurely, there will be a better outcome, potentially. and also there are many areas where there are no neonatal units in every hospital so to transport the mother to a hospital with a neonatal unit so that's what the clinical rationale for that 48 hours is. The effects on both mother and fetus are tachycardia, hypotension, and pulmonary edema. So why tachycardia? Remember beta 2 activation in skeletal muscle will cause a decrease in blood pressure and that can cause a decrease in mean arterial pressure and that will result in reflex tachycardia. Hypotension I just described, pulmonary edema, I'll get into more detail in a much later lecture. Okay let's go back to asthma and COPD. Rapid acting versions, and you see I included formoterol here even though it's a lava because it has such a quick onset. For the relief of acute bronchospasm, spasm that's happening right away, the short acting version, albuterol, evalbuterol, or formoterol, can also be used for exercise -induced bronchospasm prevention if as needed. So not on a regular basis, not on a maintenance basis, but just prior to exercise in individuals who get bronchospasm from exercise. Now the long-acting are really for maintenance. Maintenance therapy. for prophylaxis of bronchospasm with a glucocorticoid i mentioned that before in individuals who need that anti -inflammatory action in maintenance for asthma that is standard of care the glucocorticoid patients who get symptomatic asthma during the night And, again, exercise-induced bronchospasm prevention. So those are the major therapeutic uses. Many, many people experience bronchospasm. And these are just life-saving drugs and allows them to have a regular quality of life. Now, adverse effects. tremor. Well, beta 2 activation in the skeletal muscle can cause tremor. Tolerance might develop to it, or maybe some people will just experience it regularly. Tachycardia, I mentioned before, this is a reflex tachycardia due to hypotension, but there is some evidence that the direct Stimulation of cardiac beta-2 receptors might be involved, especially with the aerosol version, since so little of it gets absorbed into the systemic circulation. Tachycardia is more likely with the oral or parenteral albuterol. Metabolic effects, again, beta-2 is involved with these. hypokalemia because the stimulation of skeletal muscle through activation of beta-2 receptors will just cause potassium uptake by the skeletal muscle hyperglycemia because the drugs stimulate gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis in the liver and that increases blood sugar. And at the same time, part of that whole pathway is increasing the plasma-free fatty acids because of liberation from triglycerides stored in fat cells. As you can see, these metabolic effects occur with the parenteral administration. Why? Because there are high concentrations in the bloodstream. So the drugs can activate these beta-2 receptors, causing these metabolic effects. Now, the tremor, the tachycardia, the patient can sense the restlessness, apprehension, anxiety, feelings that come with those effects. Again, systemic administration, These are not likely with the oral inhalation. So again, we see that oral inhalation really is a preferable route of administration for many reasons. Basically, efficacy and much lower potential for side effects. moving now to the beta 3 receptor agonist this is a relatively recent addition compared to all of the other adrenergic receptor agonists on the market mirbegrin is the one with a star on it And it is used for urinary incontinence. I put a picture of the really very basic sketch of the urinary bladder. We see the beta receptors, the muscarinic receptors, and the alpha receptors. So autonomic innervation of the bladder. You may recall that the parasympathetic activation will trigger, will allow for micturition or urination. And the sympathetic nervous system has the opposite effect of preventing the, or at least I should say, inhibiting urination. The very simple pharmacokinetics here, we see maribagrin as a CYP2D6 inhibitor. Patients with overactive bladder tend to be older, maybe on other drugs. We see maribagrin's half-life is pretty long. It takes a couple of months, though, for real onset, in other words, to overcome this urinary problem. So how do they work? Activation of beta -3 receptors causes relaxation of the detrusive smooth muscle during the storage phase, and this enhances bladder capacity. So it's used for overactive bladder. with symptoms, symptomatic overactive bladder, those symptoms being urinary frequency, urgency, urge incontinence, and importantly, mirabegren, the beta -3 agonist, can be used together with an anti -muscarinic drug. So we're bringing back a concept here of M3 receptors being present in the urinary system. So antagonists of the M3 receptors are also used for the management of overactive bladder because they inhibit the acetylcholine action on the smooth muscle and therefore decrease bladder spasms, increase bladder capacity, decrease urgency and frequency. They have a pretty rapid onset by comparison and some patients may do better on the combination. Mirabegarin adverse effects can increase blood pressure, so it should be monitored. And QT interval prolongation, it's a low risk, so most people would do fine if that's the only QT interval prolongation drug on board. But the more drugs that increase QT interval prolongation that a patient takes, the more likely ventricular arrhythmia can occur. So cautions avoid in patients with severe hypertension. So this would be uncontrolled hypertension. And patients who are at a risk for QT interval prolongation. Simple concepts. Look at the adverse effects. See what the cautions are. These are drug conditions or drug disease interactions. And then, of course, we have to remember CYP2D6, mediated potential interactions. So let's do a little check your knowledge. If you like, you can pause the computer, take a look at these questions, see if you can answer them without looking. So here we go. What is the mechanistic effect of Sabahs and Labahs? Beta-2 agonists, relax, bronchial smooth muscle, and relieve bronchospasm. Easy. What are the therapeutic goals of these drugs? SABAs are called rescue halers because they are used to treat an ongoing bronchospasm and they will act quite quickly to do that and LABAs for chronic use for prevention of bronchospasm so what are common side effects tremor especially tremor can occur with the The aerosol, tachycardia can occur with the aerosol. And tremor and tachycardia can give this sensation of nervousness. These are certainly more pronounced with systemic use. And the parenteral ones, we start to see the metabolic effects. Hypokalemia, hyperglycemia, increased serum -free fatty acids. So why is inhalation the preferred route of administration for beta-2 agonists? I'm sure you understand this intuitively. A small dose delivers a high concentration of drug to the distal airways. Rapid relief of bronchospasm, generally slower with LABAs, but still faster compared to the oral administration. LABAs and ultra -LABAs have a long duration of action, so they're convenient. and they will provide that coverage for a considerable period of time. The aerosol are more effective and have reduced adverse effects compared to the oral administration. And the metered dose inhalers that they come in, these little canisters that fit in the pocket, are portable and easy to use once you get the method down. What is the function of beta-2 receptors on uterine smooth muscle during pregnancy? They are highly expressed on uterine smooth muscle throughout pregnancy, but particularly in the third trimester. And beta-2 receptors are important for preventing ********* contractions. attractions. What is the clinical rationale for systemic administration of beta-2 agonists to a pregnant person between 24 and 34 weeks gestation as tocolytic therapy? Well, you know what activation of beta -2 receptors in the uterine smooth muscle does, so you know then that it's to slow labor the idea is to slow it down for 48 hours to delay the labor to enhance fetal lung development that's the goal of therapy by providing a glucocorticoid shot a long acting glucocorticoid injection to the mother and what is current clinical use of beta 3 agonists treatment of overactive bladder with symptoms of urinary frequency urgency urge incontinence and it can be used together with a muscarinic antagonist what is the mechanism of action for this therapeutic use well activation of beta-3 receptors in the urinary bladder causes relaxation of the detrusive muscle during the storage phase, and that enhances bladder capacity. And what is the name of the drug that has the star on it? Mirabegrin. Moving now to the alpha drugs. Now these are alpha 2 adrenergic receptor agonists. Clonidine and methldopa, and there are several others, but we'll just talk about these two. Starting with clonidine. This is a far more important drug in the clinical realm than methyl dopa. Clonidine activates alpha-2 adrenergic receptors in the vasomotor center of the brainstem. So this is central, a central action. So in the CNS, there are postsynaptic alpha -2 receptors as well as presynaptic. The major mechanism appears to be activation of the postsynaptic alpha-2 receptors, which decreases, these remember these are G-I protein -coupled receptors decreases the sympathetic nervous system activity outflow from the CNS. And of course, activation of the presynaptic ones decreases the release of the neurotransmitter. That's why these are called sympatholytics, not sympathomimetics, sympatholytics because they suppress the sympathetic outflow from the cns okay so think about what the effect of that would be if we're reducing the sympathetic tone coming from the top from the cns what will be the effect lower blood pressure and reducing all other sympathetic activity. But clonidine is mainly used for lowering blood pressure. And these sympatholytic actions we'll see when we get to the therapeutic uses. I put this one in here because it can appear on a board exam or some other kinds of exams and on exam reviews. the major mechanism of clonidine appears to be its action at the alpha-2 receptor zone. So that's what we need to remember. So here's how it goes. Decreasing the heart rate, decreasing the cardiac output, decreases peripheral resistance, and that decreases blood pressure. and also is yeah it's a so you see it's acting on the heart and on the vasculature so what's happening when people are lying down that's when sympathetic tone to the vasculature is low that's just a natural thing with lying down so the major effect therefore would be the decrease in heart rate and ****** volume. So decrease in cardiac output is the major blood pressure lowering effect. When we're standing up now, there's increased sympathetic outflow to help us stand up, to squeeze our veins in order to prevent orthostatic hypotension. therefore the major effect of clonidine would be a decrease in the vascular resistance upon standing bottom line the drug decreases blood pressure so what about the therapeutic uses okay decreasing blood pressure so for use in hypertension however clonidine is not first line. It's not even second line. It's just an add-on somewhere down the way for individuals whose blood pressure is not controlled by one or two or three of the first line agents. It's also used for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. the theoretical mechanism is modulation of the sympathetic tone in the prefrontal cortex enhances attention and reduces hyperactivity and impulsivity pain management okay how why would this be used for pain it would be administered epidurally and to the spinal fluid. And therefore, clonidine, by blocking the alpha-2 receptors, will block the pain signals to the brain. So the brain is not receiving those pain signals. Hot flashes and menopause, don't know the mechanism for that. It hasn't been described. Withdrawal syndromes. Well, patients who are having opioid or smoking withdrawal are going to have sympathetic outflow increases. They're going to have these symptoms of sympathetic outflow. So clonidine was going to prevent that. And some people do well by receiving clonidine just to manage those symptoms. And then it's got several other applications. These are the main ones. You really should be aware of them. Bradycardia, reducing sympathetic outflow is going to reduce the action at the beta -1 receptors on the sinoatrial node. So that's going to result in slow heart rate. Hypotension, well, we're lowering blood pressure and hypotension can result, as well as orthostatic hypotension. The hypotension that occurs upon standing because that vasoconstrictive effect that pushes blood back to the heart when we stand up has been interfered with. This is lower on the list of likely adverse effects, but it can occur. And dry mouth. People taking clonidine complain about dry mouth. The mechanism is not clear. ****** dysfunction, it's interfering again with the sympathetic activity. This is in a red box. I'm putting it in a red box with a double line around it. So, abrupt withdrawal of the drug can cause rebound hypertension as the drug is removed and the sympathetic outflow abruptly moves into the periphery from the CNS. That can cause a marked increase in blood pressure and in heart rate. So, what do we do? We have to taper it. The drug has to be removed gradually, with a dose reduction gradually. That's called tapering. Now, this interaction with beta blockers comes up all the time because it's a really important interaction. I mentioned before that clonidine is an add-on drug, and it may be added together with a beta blocker to reduce somebody, to manage hypertension in an individual with difficult-to -manage blood pressure. If the beta blocker and clonidine are abruptly stopped together, the rebound hypertension can be really severe because of the removing, removing, I have put it down here for you, removing the two drugs at the same time or the alpha -2 agonist before the beta-blocker results in a catecholamine surge leading to unopposed vasoconstriction by activation of the alpha receptors in the vasculature. So what do we do? We withdraw the beta-blocker first, slowly taper the dose, then slowly taper the clonidine dose second. It makes sense, right? If you remove the clonidine first, then you've got all of this vasculature alpha receptors exposed, and they're going to contract. now methyl dopa methyl dopa is also an alpha 2 agonist but not methyl dopa itself methyl dopa gets converted to methyl norepinephrine alpha methyl norepinephrine using the same same enzymes that convert dopa to dopamine to norepinephrine. But this has a methyl group on the dopa, on the dopamine, and on the norepinephrine. That's why it's alpha-methyl and then the other molecule. Okay, so now alpha -methyl norepinephrine replaces norepinephrine in the storage vesicle. So when the vesicle releases its contents, it's not norepinephrine anymore, it's alpha -methylnorepinephrine. And that drug activates alpha-2 receptors in the vasomotor center of the brainstem. So it's got a similar action to clonidine. Because this guy, alpha -methylnorepinephrine, is replacing norepinephrine in the vesicles, it is referred to as a false transmitter. And I can say the boards really do like that question. They may not call it a false transmitter in the board question, but they will describe it so you could recognize it as such. Paracin, clonidine lowers blood pressure and cardiac output more than methyl dopa does. So methyl dopa does not have much therapeutic use anymore. It's an old drug that's been around for a long time before the modern drugs, even before beta blockers. So what would it be used for? Mainly hypertension in the pregnant individual. This would be chronic hypertension. Hypertension of pregnancy is a subject for another time. So just very briefly. Methyl Dopa lacks fetal adverse effects. That sounds really good. Maintains uterine blood flow. Very good. does not reduce maternal cardiac output or blood flow to the kidneys. So it's got a lot of pluses in terms of use during pregnancy. Adverse effects, well, we saw dry mouth, sedation, I forgot to highlight that with clonidine, but sedation is a big one with clonidine, and it's important. It's an important adverse effect of methyl dopa, too. But methyl dopa is also associated with depression. That's the main difference with methyl dopa in terms of typical side effects. But methyl dopa can also cause Parkinsonian symptoms, hyperprolact, anemia, gynecomastia, galacteria. If you don't know what these terms mean, please look them up. If we ever come across a term you don't know, please look it up because that will help your understanding. And we have some thankfully uncommon adverse effects, but we must keep our eyes open for these uncommon. toxicities because they can be potentially serious, hepatitis, hemolytic anemia, aplastic anemia, drug fever. These do occur, but fortunately, not commonly, not frequently. So that's methyl dopa. You can see there are considerable similarities, but also differences with clonidine. So let's check our knowledge. I invite you to have a look at these and see if you can remember them on your own. How does activation of alpha-2 receptors lead to reduction in blood pressure? Activation of central postsynaptic and presynaptic alpha-2 receptors, which are GI -PCRs, activates inhibitory neurons in the brainstem, which reduces sympathetic outflow, which leads to vasodilation and decreased vascular resistance, decreased heart rate, and decreased blood pressure. What is the proposed mechanism as to how activation of alpha-2 receptors provides pain relief? Epidural clonidine activation of spinal postsynaptic and presynaptic alpha-2 receptors prevents pain signal transmission to the brain. What is the proposed mechanism about activation of alpha -2 receptors in ADHD? And I listed a couple of drugs here that he used for ADHD. Alpha-2 agonists may regulate subcortical activity in the prefrontal cortex, the area of the brain responsible for emotions, attentions, behaviors, and it increases attention and reduces hyperactivity, impulsiveness, and distractibility. So how are they related? How are clonidine and methyl dopa the same and different? And I prepared this table, which you can find at the end of the lecture. So I'm not going to go through all of this right now. You can pause the computer if you'd like to look at it now. Pharmacology of indirect acting sympathomimetics now. This is the list. Releasing agents, catecholamine reuptake inhibitors, MAO and COMT inhibitors. Looking at this figure on the right-hand side, panel A is the mechanism of norepinephrine reuptake. So norepinephrine in the synapse gets taken back up through these doors, through these transporters, and will be restored in the vesicles. Or if it passes by MAO, it will be degraded. this little dot here is amphetamine so in panel b amphetamine gets into the presynaptic neuron and causes the release you see let me back up here you see how amphetamine is going through the transporters. It gets into and blocks up the VMAT, the vesicular monoamine transporter, so it's the door to the vesicle. It can displace the norepinephrine. Norepinephrine goes out into the cytosol. It goes out through the NET the wrong way, the backwards way, and it can therefore increase concentration in the synapse. The amphetamines also, while they're present in the NET, can become NET inhibitors and that will prevent NET from being taken back up into the synapse. And see now, this is typical of *******, where it just inhibits the NET, right here, right here. So that prevents the reuptake of norepinephrine back into the synapse. And we have a number of drugs used as antidepressants and for neuropathic pain that also block the NET. And here are a few of them. You don't have to memorize these drugs for this lecture. You will be seeing them again in this block. But they're here to kind of help you be in the picture of what these drugs are doing. And now MAO and COMT inhibitors. Obviously, if we block the action of these enzymes that degrade monoamine neurotransmitters, we're going to have increasings in neurotransmitter that's stored in the vesicle and therefore released into the synapse. The important issue here with MAO inhibitors, while they are effective in treating depression, major depressive disorder, they interact with a lot of foods. because they're inhibiting mao monoamine oxidase a particular food amino acid product called tyramine can increase and this is can increase systemic levels because it is degraded by monoamine oxidase, which is now blocked, increasing the systemic levels. And that gets into the vesicles, accumulates in there, and it displaces norepinephrine from storage vesicles, which then flow out and can cause marked hypertension. So you get a spike in the blood pressure. And these are the wonderful foods that tyramine is in high concentrations. And then there are COMT inhibitors for the use of Parkinson's disease. Same kind of concept. So the OMT will degrade the levodopa, which is the major Parkinson's drug, and therefore reduce levels going into the CNS. And by blocking that degradation in the periphery, greater amounts of levodopa get into the CNS. And now finally, the mixed-acting sympathomimetics. They are ephedrine and pseudoephedrine. which is an enantiomer of ephedrine that has a quarter of the potency of ephedrine in terms of its pressor effects. So why are they called mixed action? Because, one, they can release norepinephrine from the sympathetic neurons and also, of course, epinephrine. and that is the same mechanism we saw before and they also have a direct action they will directly activate alpha and beta receptors ephedrine is used for hypotension that can occur during surgery during anesthesia and it's available in an over in over -the-counter tablets for bronchodilation. So why bronchodilation? Beta receptor activation. Beta 2. It will increase heart rate, increase cardiac output, increase blood pressure because of all of its sympathetic actions. Bronchodilation, again, tachycardia, palpitations, dizziness, restlessness, the typical things we see with sympasomimetics. Pseudoephedrine, right here it's not a postscript is available as a behind-the -counter drug you can purchase it without a prescription but you have to show your driver's license it is a nasal congestant it's quite a decent oral nasal congestion decongestant by activating the alpha receptors in the vasculature of the nasal mucosa, and that will reduce the edema within the turbinates, nasal turbinates, and that will relieve the nasal congestion. What are three mechanistic categories of the sympathomimetic drugs? Direct acting, indirect acting, mixed acting. And what are the definitions? Here they are. Direct acting act directly. Indirect acting cause norepinephrine to do the action. Mixed acting of both. Both release of norepinephrine, which does the action, and directly activating the receptors. And here's a question. A patient with major depressive disorder unresponsive to standard antidepressant therapy is prescribed phenylzine. You don't have to know that drug. You just know the rest of this. The patient is cautioned to avoid aged cheese, pickles, deli meats, beer, wine, because consuming them can cause dangerously elevated blood pressure when taken with the phenylzine. What is the therapeutic target of action of the prescribed antidepressant? So that's what you need to know. And that is your choice here. And it is monoamine oxidase because we're talking about tyramine. A patient develops hypotension while having surgery under general anesthesia and is administered ephedrine. How does its mechanism of action differ from that of other vasopressors, such as epinephrine, norepinephrine, dopamine, and phenylephrine? Because it has this mixed action, norepinephrine releasing and direct activation on the adrenergic receptors. And here is the summary. I'm not going to go through that. You can look at that. and the check your knowledge questions with answers. Hopefully these will help you. And then, of course, I invite you to do the practice questions. And that concludes the two lectures on Sympathomimetics.