Hello, everyone. This is Isaac Kurtzer, the Department of Biomedical Science, Old Westbury campus. And here we have our second lecture on cranial nerve nuclei, those related to cranial nerves 5, as well as 7 through 12. A wide number of objectives today because we're going to be covering a wide number of cranial nerves and cranial nerve nuclei. it's going to be all of them aside from old-fashioned vision and eye movements so you're going to need to understand the particular information that's going to be relayed by all those remaining um nerves you're going to understand the relationship between the cranial nerve nuclei and those nerves and understand the general organization of those nuclei within the brainstem and finally you need to understand how particular injuries will relate to dysfunction along these pathways where it's identifiable to nerves a nuclei and that's a very complex pattern because of this non because of the complexity between nerves to nuclei that many a nerve can carry information related to several nuclei and nuclei can be transmitting information along different nerve tracks so that's really where the complexity comes in and we're going to really try to tie it all together in this lecture here we have a complete listing of all the cranial nerve nuclei that have a motor function be it somatic be it brachial be it visceral we have the associated nerve or nerves linked to that nuclei listed as well and lastly the effector systems involved so abducens nucleus is going to only be related to a single nerve and it's going to impact eye movement control actually just of a single muscle directly the lateral ****** to enable abduction of the eye so we went over the um three nerves for the eye that was really simple but it's going to be getting increasingly complex as we go throughout this list it starts out pretty simple here and for the next slide it's going to be more complex with the cranial nerve nucleic sensory function It is the complete list of cranial nerve nuclei that have a sensory function. All of these nuclei will be second order neurons that will be receiving afferent information from the periphery relayed by the given nerves that you see listed to the side. It might be visceral sensory afferents, mass sensory afferents, special sensory afferents, but they're all going to be targeting these nuclei. They're listed, and they'll have a role in sensory function that will be indicated on the right. Take your time going through this slide and the previous slide. Hit pause. Really kind of make notes, however it is, to get yourself prepped for the material that follows. Because if you were able to do this, you'd already have the lecture here. It says, I need to now walk through each of these connections in detail because it is difficult. So try to do some prep work beforehand. So there's a key at the bottom of a number of figures that's going to have the same coloring as what we saw for the functions before. So motor is always something kind of like in the yellow, orange, red scheme. and then we have green blue and purple for the sensory functions just as help keep that in your mind I won't be writing brachial motor on every slide I'll be having I'll be having something described with a given color so that's what I'm referring to this slide shows the same information that we had in the previous two but now with the placement of these cranial nerve nuclei within the brain stem so midbrain pons medulla the most rostral of all the nuclei would be the editing westfall the most caudal would be the trigeminal spinal insofar as a very long nucleus and the most caudal portion is in fact found within the cervical spinal cord. So again, take your time going through all of this information before we go to the next slide. And lastly, we have all the information put together in a chart form where the nerves are going to be defining the rows and the function are going to be defining the columns and people can get heart palpitations at this point but they shouldn't because there's only some only so much that is very difficult to understand much of it is very easy to understand so the hypoglossal nucleus is very straightforward because it's one nucleus associated with one nerve that has a very straightforward function to control the tongue And the cranial nerve 8 is going to be related to the vestibular nucleus, the cochlear nucleus, and it's called vestibular cochlear nerve. So that's very straightforward. cranial nerve five this is pretty much easy enough because uh on the right we have that it's going to be uh these three nuclei the trigeminal mesosophallic pontine and uh spinal all have to do with um touch and proprioception uh for the face or pain and temperature for the face so it's all about sensory information about the face and the trigeminal motor is for the jaw so that's pretty yoked together now remember the cranial nerve nuclear always sensory or always motor it can't be both whereas the cranial nerves can be mixed they'll be conveying afferents that are conveying afferents and efferents sensory information and motor information and overall 12 is easy eight is easy five is easy seven is tough er but there's a helpful vignette that i'm going to give you nine is a bit more complex i got a helpful name for you and then 10 is is admittedly quite tough but there is a pattern within here so we start with cranial nerve five, which are going to be yoked to motor nuclei and sensory nuclei. So this image shows the trigeminal nucleus. It doesn't give any further information about a subdivision of that trigeminal nucleus. And the parentheses five means the information about this motor nucleus will be relayed these via five on the right we have again trigeminal nuclei not given with any further definitions other than saying sensory and the aspirants to those nuclei are going to be traveling along the trigeminal nerve the um cranial nerve uh seven nine and ten so we'll be discussing seven nine and ten later we're going to be focusing on cranial nerve five and then referring to the nuclei that it's going to be involved in which are going to be on the motor side and the sensory side because As I can see, five on both sides. So there are three different divisions of the trigeminal nerve, hence tri. We have one, two, and three, which will be called ophthalmic maxillary mandibular. The first two, we're laying information that is somatosensation, so these are all afferents. And the mandibular is going to be a mixed nerve. Turning to the nuclei, we have the trigeminal pontine nucleus, which is going to be processing information from those three nerve divisions solely related to touch and proprioception. This is going to be analogous to the cuneate and gracile nuclei of the dorsal column. They are second order nuclei processing touch and proprioception for the body. This would be for the face. And so the trigeminal spinal nucleus would be processing afferent information about pain and temperature. So this would be analogous to the nucleus procreus in the spinal cord that will then be forming the spinal thalamic tract. I should also note that they're going to be processing information, these nuclei are going to be processing information, not just from the face, but also the eye. And it's going to be because you can feel pressure on the eye, right? It can hurt if you scratch your eye, right? Well, that information is going to be relayed through the trigeminal nerve to those respective nuclei. And there's going to be information targeting these nuclei coming from other cranial nerves. And that would be relaying touch information, let's just say, for the tongue and upper throat vis-a-vis cranial nerve 9. And we'll go over that soon enough. But I'm trying to reemphasize that these nuclei are going to be processing information from several nerves. the face is the most prominent of those, and that's going to be for this nerve. Now, turning to trigeminal mesosemphalic nucleus and the motor nucleus right below it, I link those together because this is going to be supporting a jaw-**** reflex. So the trigeminal motor nucleus is going to have the cell bodies to drive various muscles of mastication like masseter like temporalis and that would be through that mixed nerve v3 also the jaw proprioception is relayed um uh um involves this mesosimphallic nucleus and interestingly enough this quote nucleus it's a nucleus because it's within it's a cell body within the parenchyma of the brain it's inside the brain stem at a mid -brain level but the cell body actually is for a first order afferent okay so that's not a second order afference it's as if you took a dorsal root ganglia and just shoved it into the spinal cord so this is a very unique situation um i can't think of any other examples of it but it should be noted that that That nucleus for proprioception for the jaw is going to be then sending an axon and a synapse to the trigeminal motor nucleus, and that together will allow a stretch reflex for the jaw. This is a transverse section through the pons, which is going to provide a view of the trigeminal pontine nucleus that is involved in face mass sensation. So touch and proprioception for the face is a very large nucleus. They also call it the principal trigeminal nucleus. That's the same thing as the trigeminal pontine nuclei we're not going to show sections throughout the brainstem because remember it goes from mid midbrain all the way to the most caudal portion of the medulla for the spinal trigeminal nucleus this slide does a good job showing you the various fields or the portions of the trigeminal nerve the territory that they'll innervate for ophthalmic maxillary and mandibular we have nuclei there shown and they're going to be boxed according to whether they're going to be sensory or motor i want to also point out that the back of the head is going to have its cutaneous information handled by a a spinal nerve C2. The pontine trigeminal nucleus is located within the pons. It will be receiving touch and proprioceptive information about the ipsilateral face. It's a second-order neuron. The first-order neurons for it have their cell bodies within the trigeminal ganglia. The spinal trigeminal nucleus runs from the lowermost pons to upper spinal cord, so the third cervical segment of the spinal cord, and this very long column of nuclei is going to be processing information from the ipsilateral face regarding pain and temperature. So those first-order afferents also have their cell body within the trigeminal ganglion. Now let's just say that we had a section through the upper medulla like so. This would not interfere with the transmission of information about touch and proprioception because those first order afferents will be targeting the unaffected pontine trigeminal nucleus which would then have its its axons the axons of the second order neuron would decussate and to ascend to the thalamus. In contrast, this section would disrupt the flow of information from the first order afferents to the second order afferents for pain and temperature. So there cannot be pain and temperature information transmitted to the second order afferents, hence they cannot relay it to the thalamus. So putting that together, one would have a loss of temperature and pain for one side of the face, but intact touch and proprioception. The last thing I want to point out here is the mesoemphalic trigeminal nucleus and the motor nucleus. So these mesoemphalic, these are first order afferents. That's where their cell bodies are, as opposed to the trigeminal ganglion targeting the pontine and the spinal divisions. These first order afferents of the mesosophallic nucleus will lay jaw proprioception and they will have a direct link to the trigeminal motor nucleus, which is located here, sending its inference out to control the jaw on the ipsilateral side for clinical conditions that would involve cranial nerve five bands associated nuclei we could have an impact to the face that could selectively damage one of the three divisions of the trigeminal nerve so just like knock out the ophthalmic branch for example there's trigeminal neurologia so this is thought to be caused by demyelination of the nerve regardless it refers to this recurrent intense pain that would involve the eyes the lips the face and recurrent meaning hundreds of times a day. It's not like oh well once every couple hours I have some pain. It just goes on and on and on and it's so disruptive that they call it the suicide disease. And lastly among our examples we have the loss of the corneal reflex. So this would require afferent information traveling through this cranial nerve. You can test this by just you know having a light touch of the eyelids with a q-tip and if somebody is not expressing that then you know right off that there is going to be a problem it could be tracked down to the afferent limb of v1 turn now cranial nerve 7 the facial nerve and the motor nuclei associated with it would be the facial motor nucleus and superior salivary nucleus the sensory nuclei will be divisions of the trigeminal sensory trigeminal nuclei if you have any question you just look do I see a seven in here yes I do do I see a seven in here yes I do and that's why we're talking about it the cranial nerve nuclei that are yoked to this nerve include the facial motion nucleus which is going to be controlling all the facial expression muscles on the ipsilateral face as well as some upper neck musculature as well as little old stapedius which is the smallest striated muscle in the body we have the superior salivatory nucleus, which is ultimately going to be controlling the lacrimal gland vis-a-vis a peripheral ganglion, as well as the glands for saliva within the mouth itself, submandibular and sublingual. We have the gustatory nucleus, which is going to be very important for relaying taste for the front two -thirds of the tongue, and the trigeminal nucleus that's going to be relaying information about skin on the external ear. Now, this is quite a bit of material. How do you put all this together? And I have this cheeky little vignette that's partially inspired by my time in Queens, New York. And so humor me here. Enjoying a Greek olive, not chewing, just tasting and smiling and drooling a bit. And the tears well up. It's just so tasty. And then my wife drags me out of the store by the ear. Okay, so this has all of the components there. It's not jaw chewing. It's not the mastication muscles. It's just tasting and smiling. And so we have the upper and lower half of the face muscles for that and drooling a bit. So that's yolk to salivatory nucleus and tears once again. And lastly, because I was distractible, my wife pulls me out of the store by my ear so that's the uh taste excuse me the uh the uh somatosensory uh information uh that's going to be going to the trigeminal nucleus so this is my little vignette make up your own um as needed and i hope that was helpful here is a cross section through the mid pons that's going to be showing the placement for various nuclei for the cranial nerve seven here we have a image showing the flow of information from various nuclei to their destination like the facial motor nucleus that will be within the brain stem and then it will be targeting the upper and lower musculature of the face we have the salivatory nucleus superior salivatory nucleus traveling out of the brain targeting a peripheral ganglion which will then relay efferents to the lacrimal gland i encourage you to look through this and try to get some insight the facial motor nucleus will control the upper and lower half of the face on that side so have ipsilateral control of the upper and lower half of the face that nucleus for a given side of the brain stem will receive input from the cerebral cortex on both sides so this is indicated by yellow and orange for the left and the right side of the cerebral cortex so that will target the left and right cerebral cortex vis -a-vis the bolt cortical bulbar tract will target a given facial motor nucleus on one side now where the complexity comes in is that the cortical control is not fully bilateral it's only going to be bilateral for the upper half of the face so you can see that the musculature the that's what's trying to indicate here is that the control of the muscles for one half of the face is both for the left and the right that's why it's going to be alternating yellow and orange here Whereas for the lower half of the face, it's just going to be a single color, indicating that the cranial nerve nuclei will receive cortical balbar input from just one side of the cerebral cortex, the contralateral side. Because of this complex relationship of the corticobulbar input to the facial motor nuclei, we could have different patterns of paralysis reflecting different origins for the dysfunction. If one was to have a paralysis of the lower half of the face, in theory, you could have damaged the cranial nerve just for that inferior division. Alternatively, you could have damaged the upper motor neurons above it so that you still had intact the ability to raise one's eyebrows but lost the ability to control that muscles of facial expression on the lower half because those would be entirely driven by the corticobulbar tracts of the contralateral cerebral cortex. Alternatively, if you lost motor control for the entire half of the face, that could be tracked back to nerve or nuclear damage on the same side was damage to that nerve the entire cranial nerve seven then you would also have a dysfunction amongst all the other information that would be relayed through that nerve so that would include taste for the interior two thirds of the tongue and ability to produce saliva would be diminished and you'd hear louder sounds on that side of your ear because you would no longer have control of the stupideous muscle. We're moving now to cranial nerve eight which is the vestibular cochlear nerve and that will be yoked to the vestibular and cochlear nuclei. That's really quite simple. We can see for each nuclei, there's only one nerve that is involved, and these are entirely sensory. The nucleus is going to be processing information from the cochlea related to hearing, and the vestibular nucleus is going to be processing information from the various vestibular organs related to how your head is moving in external space you'll soon see that the vestibular nucleus is extremely large and it's going to be communicating to the cerebellum it's going to be communicating to various um nuclei for ocular motor control vis-a -vis the MLF there's the vestibular spinal tracts for controlling the orientation of the head and the extension of the legs here we have a section transverse section of upper medulla that will show the very small cochlear nucleus on the lateral just lateral to this now very large inferior cerebellar peduncle that will be traveling to the cerebellum medial to that pretty much up to this point is the vestibular nucleus at this level and it goes considerably further below so this is really is quite a massive nucleus There's many subnuclei within that for a variety of functions, but we put that all together as, say, vestibular nucleus. Just a small list of conditions that could impact cranial nerve and its associated nuclei. One could have acute exposure to ethanol at a level such that it changes the osmolarity of the endolymph of the semicircular canals and this would trick the system into thinking that it is moving because you have a displacement of the membrane at the end that's incorrectly saying oh I'm spinning this way or I'm spinning that way and it's going to be disorganized as well And that would be vertigo. Now we have Meniere's disease, which is a very well-known condition, though rare, where there's a triad of symptoms of diminished ability to detect sound at particular frequencies, high frequencies, and a sense of oral fullness. and then you also feel that you're spinning. It's a very disruptive condition that can come on pretty much all of a sudden, and then it can last for hours and hours and hours. And so that's why it's well known is because it's so debilitating. Don't know exactly where the cause is, but we have inflammation of the canals is a good possibility. Other things is if you disrupt the vestibular nucleus itself, you could have a loss of ability to really maintain oneself upright and activate those leg muscles on the ipsilateral side appropriately. So these are things that you should keep in mind. Moving on to cranial nerve 9, the glossopharyngeal nerve, we can have the boxes on the sensory side saying um that these are the nuclei that are going to be um targeted by information conveyed by this nerve so i'm looking for this um roman nine symbol in here and lo and behold i see it and i see it for the solitary nucleus as well and for nucleus and biggest and for the inferior salivatory. So this nerve is going to be having motor and sensory functions relayed by it. Cranial nerve nine is going to be conveying information to and from a number of nuclei. Let's start with the motor ones. Nucleus embigus, this has a brachial motor function. Most of the efferents from this nucleus are conveyed through cranial nerve 10, but a particularly important one is through cranial nerve 9 that is directed to the stylopharyngeus muscle, which is an important particular phase of swallowing. We have the inferior salivatory nucleus. It's going to be targeting that large gland located within the cheek. We have afferents that will be targeting the gustatory nucleus for taste. This would be originating from the posterior one-third of the tongue. You may remember that the anterior two -thirds would be via cranial nerve seven, so this would be the rest. We have some baroreceptive feedback to the solitary nucleus. And lastly, we have a little bit more information coming up from the periphery destined to the trigeminal nucleus this would be for the both divisions the pontine and spinal divisions of the trigeminal nucleus for sensing the posterior one -third of the tongue as well as the throat in the ear so the anterior one-third of the tongue was through the trigeminal nerve the the rest of touch the rest of somatic sensation for the tongue for touch proprioception pain temperature all that would be now here being relayed through cranial nerve nine seeing some From different nuclei that had not come up before, the nucleus embigus, which has most of its output conveyed through the vagus nerve, but there is one important set of axons that will be targeting the silo pharyngeus muscle, and those will be relayed through cranial nerve 9. This is important for a particular phase of swallowing. Now, we have the inferior salivatory nucleus. This is going to be targeting that very large gland for salivation. In the cheek, we have the rest of taste for the tongue that is going to be the posterior. one-third of the tongue is going to be its information is going to be heading to the nuclear gustatory nucleus the gustatory nucleus is going to be getting the information from the anterior and for the entire tongue it's a matter of which nerve does it go through for cranial nerve seven would be the anterior two-third for the for the rest is going to be through CN9. We have solitary nucleus. This is going to be some baroreceptor feedback from the sinus and the body. We have the trigeminal nucleus again. This would be for the posterior one-third of the tongue. So the anterior one-third of the tongue was again cranial nerve uh nine and uh so this is a complex nerve um arguably more complex than cranial nerve seven because i don't have a good vignette for this i mean i thought of one involving like a hot pepper but it never really and you know swallowing it just never really worked so let's just go back to the name of the nerve aside from nine which is glossopharyngeal so much of this is related to that nerve and that's why they called it such right the anatomists were on the right track here so glasso means the tongue and it's going to be related to speak so no glossary right there is this word glossalia which is like to speak in tongues as if one was inspired it's not of actual words but you're you're saying word -like things and then there's the fairing so all of these functions would kind of fall within that the glossopharyngeal function so I really think that that's the best way of getting a handle on what is being conveyed through this and then knowing the nuclei associated with that I think that's going to be pretty straightforward here is a section through the medulla where we have the glossopharyngeal nerve entering and exiting. You might remember that six, seven, eight are going to be on that ponto medullary junction and the glossopharyngeal is going to be one starting to travel down the length of the medulla. so the nuclei for the related to this nerve they're going to be many of them are going to be nearby this level and then we have the placements of the nuclei in this medial lateral arrangement according to the functions that we've talked about before motor is medial and sensory is lateral Last anatomical image for the glossopharyngeal nerve cranial nerve 9 and the afferents and efferents related to it, as well as the nuclei, the motor and sensory nuclei that are related to that. And this is just to help provide an understanding of the geometry of those nuclei within the brainstem. Now on to cranial nerve 10, the vagus nerve, the wanderer. We can see that the vagus nerve will be conveying information that is going to be ultimately yoked to the nucleus and vagus, dorsomotor nucleus of the vagus on the motor side, on the sensory side to the solitary nucleus and trigeminal. you can see X's in all of these different boxed nuclei. The vagus is going to be conveying information that is comparable to what we saw with cranial nerve 9. It's also pretty brutal to get a handle on these nuclei, but there is some overlap with what we had before. There's nucleus ambiguous that we saw with cranial nerve 9 as I mentioned this was a brachial motor nuclei to control many of the things about swallowing and so before it was just a single muscle here it's everything else so the striated muscles for soft palate fairings and muscles for the vocal cords so you really have a a lot of opportunities to have dysfunction of these effectors with damage to this cranial nerve the dorsal motor nucleus is going to be providing that parasympathetic control to so many different parts of our body including the gi tract and the heart before this is the rest and digest functions as opposed to the fight-and-flight functions of the sympathetic system the solitary nucleus is where it really is going to come on board it's also called the nucleus of the solitary track and so this is going to be getting viscero -sensory and put from a whole pile of different internal portions of your body the abdominal and thoracic viscera as well as some chemosensitive receptive inputs and lastly we have trigeminal nucleus the skin of the back of the ear and the ear canal so just a little bit more of the ear for touch as well as pain and temperature sensation going to the different divisions of the trigeminal nucleus I want to highlight that the vagus nerve is really thought of uh often for this parasympathetic uh function in terms of efference as as it should that's good but most of the relationship to the um the abdominal and thoracic viscera and the heart and so on these portions of the they're under autonomic control most of that processing vis-a-vis the cranial nerve are things going up to the solitary nucleus so 80% up to 80% are autonomic afferents not efferents and so that's really neat right it's like only could be 40 to even just 20% are on the motor side to those organs and 80 is going to be sensory information from and people really don't think about that when they're talking about the vagus nerve and its relationship to the periphery the autonomic systems but lots of it is feedback i find that very compelling This transverse section through the medulla is going to be one where we can see some of the nuclei associated or yoked through cranial nerve 10. i'm pointing out s right here that's going to be the solitary nucleus and then mx this is dorsal motor nucleus and i want to point out two other things one is that the ambiguous nucleus is through a huge territory and we're not really pointing to it very clear like here's the ambiguous nucleus it's like literally within this territory and that's why it's called ambiguous because it with these standard staining techniques it's very unclear to identify this kind of concentrated uh clusters it's kind of a little bit intermingled so it's called ambiguous which is like literally they're shrugging their shoulders and going i i don't know it's it's it's a vowel right here and so that's why it's called ambiguous um also this image allows us to see the solitary tract and so you may remember from the previous slide that the solitary nucleus is also called the nucleus of the solitary tract and this is where there's kind of a little bit of irony because the the nucleus solitary nucleus should not be considered solitary right because it's getting inputs from everywhere of the viscera right there's so much visceral information traveling to it so it's not lonely it's not solitary so why do we get this name solitary nucleus well because of the tract the tract stands out as so distinct within this territory of the solitary nucleus and the dorsal motor nucleus and so that's why it can be more properly understood as the nucleus of the solitary tract the solitary tract really stands out alone by itself the efferents of nucleus and biggest travel out through cn10 to innervate the ipsilateral throat. So if you had a lesion at the level of that nucleus or the nerve, you would have ipsilateral paralysis. In contrast, that nucleus, like most of the others of the cortical bulbar system received bilateral input from cerebral cortex and that means a lesion to the cortex of the bilateral of the representation of the throat on one side would be compensated for by the other side of cerebral cortex or unilateral cortical lesion will be largely compensated so there's a variety of ways that you can have damage to the cranial nerve as well as the nuclei that are yoked to this nerve one example is a aneurysm or tumors in the throat and neck and we're talking about the control of the the soft palate, the pharynx, the larynx, so you'd have issues with hoarseness in speaking, difficulties in swallowing, problems with the gag reflex. This is going to be the most immediate thing that's going to come to your attention. There are also autonomic dysfunctions that can result because of that loss of parasympathetic drive, as well as altered sensory information coming up from the from the viscera to feedback from the viscera and the end result of that could be some issues with acid reflux or a more rare case where we have paralysis or near paralysis of the GI system gastroparesis which is very very serious, but rare. Now we're back to something simple again. That was tough before. Now we're simple, so it's all good. Take a breath. So cranial nerve 11, the spinal accessory nerve, is going to be yoked to just one nucleus, the spinal accessory nucleus. It's called that because of how caudal the nucleus is found within in the medulla but also within the spinal cord final accessory nuclei for the spinal accessory nerve will be targeting the sternocleidomastoid and upper trapezius muscle on the same side so the SCM is going to be involving in turning the head to the side and then the upper trapezius shrugging that shoulder some people have reported that the cortical ball bar projections to this nucleus is ipsilateral and when i tracked down the uh did a thorough literature search for that i did find evidence for that from some studies um but we are going to stick with bilateral control because that's the most common thing that's reported you know a lecture three years from now maybe there's going to be some more definitive evidence but let's just say that this is something that's up in the air but we will stick with bilateral control uppermost reaches of the spinal accessory nucleus are within the lower most portion of the medulla we know that we're in the lower most portion of the medulla because we have this pyramidal decussation right you do not no longer have two clear cell uh i mean two clear columns um we now can see the decussation so we're at the lowest um portion of the medulla and right here where you would have the ventral horn we have the spinal accessory nucleus so it really is a continuation of that ventral horn. This image will be showing how long and caudal is the spinal accessory nucleus, most of it being located within the spinal cord going all the way down to C5. We have the efferents emanating from that nuclei which must travel up through the foramen magnum and then down through the jugular foramen to target the SEM and trapezius muscles so there's a very long journey that they may need to make up over and then down and so that makes them susceptible to damage so damage to cranial nerve 11 or to the nucleus would lead to the same dysfunction which is atrophy of the target muscles like we have this trapezius palsy it's really quite evident for her our left arm you can see the winged scapula this is because she wore a really heavy backpack and that's what caused it but most often what causes this palsy is because of a doctor doing surgery and accidentally causing some damage along the way. Like if you're going to be going through the posterior cervical triangle to get a biopsy of one of the many lymph nodes that can be accessed through there, then you can damage nerve and so that sort of injury is called iatrogenic so iatrogenic injury is the most common cause for this sort of palsy okay the last cranial nerve number 12 the hypoglossal nerve yoked to the hypoglossal nucleus you like to remember that the hypoglossal nerve is seen on the ventral surface of the medulla just medial to the olives and so that would be seeing the nerves as they exit on out the nuclei is actually found at the all the way on the other side it's a motor nucleus has to be behind this medial lemniscus and the the pyramids it's very very distinct nuclei just by this fourth ventricle for nuclei are going to be innervating all of the internal muscles and most of the external muscles of the tongue here is an example of somebody that has severe atrophy of their tongue on one side and we can see how much loss of muscle there was right you can see that there's just huge gaps here because it's like you deflated a tire and the tongue is kept in cheek in the lips because as soon as they stick their tongue out we can see it just flops to the side so it's just kept in check by being in this lips as soon as they drop their lip it popped to the top to the side and because we have this unopposed action from the um intact tongue muscles so the tongue will deviate to the weak side and um this is something that you should be you know looking for this maybe was a isolated issue or was a consolation of problems of a deviated uh tongue a deviated ovula for the soft palate hoarseness all those things together are going to allow you to track down whether it's restricted to a nerve or is it going to be something that's going to involve a particular region of the brainstem or maybe it's going to be involving the cerebral cortex now we're going to be talking about a couple of brainstem strokes that will involve a cluster of symptoms which you should be able to understand given the material in the preceding slides. So if you had a ****** of the interior spinal artery which would be supplying this region shown in blue and dots we would have a lesion of the hypoglossal nucleus, we'd have a lesion to the medial laminiscus and cortospinal tract, and this would be expressed as an inability to control the muscles of the body on the contralateral side and loss of touch and proprioceptive information for the body on the contralateral side and an inability to control the tongue on the same side. So the tongue will point to this side of the lesion. Lateral medullary syndrome occurs with a ****** of pica posterior inferior cerebellar artery, and there are a large number of structures that are impacted because of the broad blood supply of the pica. So we have the nucleus ambigus in this territory. So as a result, you'd have hoarseness or difficulty in swallowing. The spinal thalamic tract is found in here. So you'd have diminished pain and temperature sensation on the opposite side of the body. We have the spinal trigeminal nucleus and tract. So this would be interfering with the ipsilateral pain and temperature for the face. So this would be an alternation of pain and temperature dysfunction. So ipsilateral face, contralateral body. You could also have some discoordination because you're impacting this inferior cerebral peduncle which is providing a great deal of information to the cerebellum from the ipsilateral side of the body and we have the vestibular nucleus as well so you could have symptoms of falling to the lateral side so many different symptoms that can be expressed with a ****** to pica all right so that's all the material for this lecture the summary of this information can be found in this slide i'm not going to read through each line you can go through that on on your own it's going to refer obviously back to different sections of the material it's tough material so just give it a second try give it a third try if needed and you'll get it. I hope the material was clear enough it's quite complex material, I understand. Feedback is appreciated.