Hello, once again, everybody. My name is Dr. Richard Morgan, and here we are presenting. I will be taking you through the second of three DPR neurologic exams. Today will be the second portion of our three-part series, including motor system, coordination, gait, reflexes, as well as some special techniques that will go on at the afterwards. similar to the previous objectives these objectives will involve reviewing the screening of the neurologic examination performing an assessment of the motor system coordination gait reflexes as well as some special techniques and how to document the findings we will have similar slides as we had on the first lecture series where we have demonstrations and examples of documentation now again neurologic exam as i showed this before this is more of a a rehashed slide that starts with patient history. What are the important components of the neurologic exam? How do we do a detailed HPI, history of present illness, and focus it on the neurologic exam? That's when a patient presents with one or more of the following symptoms. And like I said before, this is not an all-inclusive or exhaustive list, but more than more common presentations. They include headache, dizziness, vertigo, weakness of an extremity, Possible numbness or tingling or any abnormal absence, sensation in the arms or legs, neurosyncope or syncope, sort of passing out, a history of seizures recently, and then possibly some tremors or involuntary movements. Components of a screening exam, as gone through before, I won't rehash it, but please use this for your references. It includes all the base components of this neurologic screening exam as I went over on the first slide. And then from the first lecture, I talked to this. Now, motor system, okay? Motor pathways involve both upper motor neurons that will synapse with lower motor neurons and then to the peripheral structures, which terminate in the neuromuscular junction, okay? Now, it's broken up into two components, both the upper and the lower motor neurons. Now, you're gonna get a lot of this in neuroanatomy. My job isn't gonna be to go over all this detail specifically. This is more for referencing, but what's important is, and you can read the definitions here, I want you to start to learn and appreciate how these upper motor neuron presentations, if you will, from a patient perspective will present in a physical exam, how doing certain physical exam skills will present, and depending on how they are demonstrating will determine if they're either positive or negative, or either an upper or lower motor neural lesion. Again, motor function involves three principal motor pathways, including the corticospinal or frontal tracts, the cerebellar system, and the basal galleon system. Again, much of this will be found in your neuroanatomy lectures. again principal motor pathways are labeled here and displayed for your purposes it's important to know this again for purposes of dpr i'm going to be spending more time on the components of the physical exam and you'll start to as you pick up through the course of this semester start to really start to put together the clinical correlations with the pathophysiology and that will really give you much more detail and that's really what the boards love to do on their on their concept questions as well. Two of the other principal motor pathways include, like I said, the basal ganglion system as well as cerebellar. Basal ganglion helps maintain muscle tone and control body movements, such as walking, and cerebellar receives sensory motor input that coordinates motor activity, maintaining equilibrium and assistive and show posture. We're going to have, I'm going to go over very specific ways we're going to demonstrate this in DPR and some of the physical exams that we'll be practicing over and over. Upper and lower motor neural lesions, they're basically labeled out here. And this is an important slide because it helps kind of bring everything together, if you will. What kind of lesions, how do we determine if there's a lesion, and what physical signs do we find on a physical exam that help us kind of demonstrate that there is an upper motor neuron lesion. So as it says here, if there's the UMN system is damage that occurs above the crossover in the medulla, motor impairment, weakness, and paralysis is on the contralateral side, right? So if the upper motor neuron system damage occurs below the crossover in the medulla, then motor impairment is ipsilateral on the same side, okay? Other forms of upper motor neural lesions can display a spasticity or angle clonus, which we can get into it a little bit. Muscle tone is increased. Deep tendon reflexes, which we'll be demonstrating in a little bit, they're more exaggerated, meaning what we call hyperreflexia. Okay. And then finally, Babinski's sign, which we use to determine upper motor neural lesions, oftentimes in someone who's exhibited a ****** or other kind of significant neurologic injury, is a test for literally an upper motor neural lesion, and the foot will go over that as well. And then finally, the lower motor neural lesions. What does that involve? Mostly motor impairment with weakness and paralysis on the hips lateral side. And this is demonstrated in the physical exam by atrophy or muscle tone is down. The reflexes that we'll be demonstrating are all decreased or hyperreflexive or possibly even absence. Muscle mass is atrophic. It's weakened or damaged. And oftentimes this is due to a damage to the innervating nerve to that muscle or possibly something from the cervical or the lumbar spine. And then finally, fasciculations or an irritated nerve root, a peripheral nerve root generally, are also signs of lower motor neural antigens. Now, why is this important? Many specific disease processes are labeled or categorized, if you will, as upper or lower motor neural antigens. Some have both. I'll give you a classic example. I'll give you a moment to think and give you one classic example that contains both upper and motor neural lesions. Well, the example I was thinking of was amyotrophic lateral sclerosis or Lou Gehrig's disease. One of the classic distributions or presentations of Lou Gehrig's disease is signs of both upper and lower motor neural lesions in the disease process. Of course, there's other things component, but as you can imagine, it's a very disabling and likely disease with a very, very high mortality rate. So it's important to diagnose these things. But it just goes to the importance of why we want to go examine and really understand the clinical correlations between the physical exams that we perform and trying to determine if there are either upper or low in motor narrow lesions. Just a few other examples. Lesions to the cortical spinal tract. Basal ganglion or cerebellar systems, the corticospinal tract, we often see weakness, right? So weakness in any muscles, ipsilateral, can be both sides, but oftentimes one as well, depending on the disease process. Basal ganglion will also do changes in muscle tone, often increased disturbances in posture and gait, or slowness or lack of spontaneous or automatic movements, including in various involuntary movements. And we'll go through this when we go over some of the other examples of physical examination. Finally, cerebellar system lesions will include impairment of coordination, gait, equilibrium, as well as decreased muscle tone. And we will have some very specific cerebellar physical exam skills that we'll be practicing as well. Now, muscles. Well, how do we assess muscles? Okay. Just as we always did in the past, we want to observe. We want to inspect. Look at the body at rest so that there's no force. There's no contractile movement put on these muscles. How does the body look at rest? Are there any involuntary movements? Do you notice any tremors, tics, or fasciculations? Ask the patient if they've ever noticed anything before. What describes the muscle bulk? Is it symmetrical? Is there any noted unilateral or bilateral atrophy or wasting? Muscle tone. Assessing the muscle's resistance, passive stretch. Okay, and we go into this with active and passive range of motion. As well as muscle strength by asking patients to actively resist your movement. Now, you might be thinking, why is it so important to include the motor system here in the neurologic lecture? Well, I'm going to tell you. We're going to cover the MSK, the musculoskeletal system, in much more detail later in the semester. But the reason we need to incorporate it here is because oftentimes specific focal motor deficits can correlate directly and give us insight, not only if it's upper versus lower motor neural lesions, but really isolate us to a specific level of the cervical and or lumbar spine, most likely to correlate specific with clinical disease. For instance, someone who has muscle wasting or atrophy of a calf muscle can often associate it with specifically an S1 nerve root. So knowing motor system and how it correlates to neuromuscular is vital to understand the neurosystem as well. Here's an example of muscle atrophy. The first two slides in the upper left here, you'll notice it's a 44 -year-old, good muscle bulk, good tone in the fingers, everything looks good. There's no signs of any kind of focal atrophy or wasting in the muscles. Now note the 84-year -old who does exhibit some atrophy. You can see this is an exaggerated case, but it really goes to show you what happens when you have isolated muscle wasting or gross muscle wasting of specific areas. note the interosseous muscles in the fingers that are atrophic, as well as the hypothenar atrophy noted in the thumb there as well, as well as the venar cladding. And it's important to document this very, very specifically in your notes, because again, it goes towards what could be causing this atrophy. Is it unilateral? Is it bilateral? And due to the increased number of muscles involved is likely more than what they're involved as well. Motor system. Now, how do we break down motor system? Motor weakness, okay, or muscle weakness, I should say, is always going to be labeled as one of two things. It's either proximal or distal. Proximal refers to the peripheral limbs that are closest to the axial spine. So in this case, Shoulder and hip girdle would be proximal. Distal would be the hands and the feet. Identify by asking about difficulty combing hair. How can we ask or incorporate whether or not a patient might be exhibiting proximal motor weakness? You ask them about their social or ADLs. How do they take care of ADLs, which is activities of daily living? Do they have difficulty bathing, feeding, dressing, such as combing their hair? Do they have any difficulty making or drinking coffee in the morning? Ask them about simple tasks, that things that can be not as challenging for many people, but it can be really challenging for people struggling with this. And it's really important to get a good baseline. Proximal muscles help you get in and out of a chair or climb stairs. You know, getting an idea of their surroundings at home, give you an insight as to whether or not they're going to be continually struggling with their activities of daily living down the line. Distally, all right, hands and feet. ask about hand strength when opening a jar or tripping when walking? Do they stumble over themselves when they cross the street? Have they ever had any kind of history of falls recently? And if so, how many? And if so, do they recall how they might have fallen? You know, it's one thing it, you know, it just happened suddenly or if someone pushed you, but obviously tripping or not remembering why you fell is important to always consider that there could be a component of weakness. And then here we go with muscle strength abnormalities. These are some basic definitions. Paralysis, absence of strength. Pharesis is where strength is impaired. Hemiparesis is weakness, usually unilateral, to one side of the body, such as with a CVA or ******. Hemiplegia is paralysis to one side of the body, and so on and so forth. I won't go through the list, but you have them here for your edification, and please use them as for your references. So this is a common muscle strength scan that we'll be using when we do physical exams and do motor strength testing throughout our time in the spring semester within the DPR lab. So it really is important because each time you examine and test motor strength of a specific muscle group, you need to document clearly exactly what the motor strength was for each muscle counting. And it can be done, if it's all normal, it can be done written out very easily and succinctly. so understanding the strength scale is vital here zero being no muscle contraction is detective and five is active movement against full resistance so the three most important are zero three and five and everything else can be kind of inferred from there so zero no muscle contraction five is full motor strength with full resistance three is active movement against gravity so what that means is the patient can hold their hand up or leg up against gravity, but that's it. Anytime you place any kind of pressure on it, it collapses. So two would be active movement with gravity eliminated, where they really can't even hold it up with gravity eliminated. So they really do struggle with that as well. And then four would be some resistance against gravity, but not full resistance is noted. So you'll get a lot of practice doing this. We're going to do this in all of our individual pods when we practice this spring semester, both in the neuro labs as well as in the MSK musculoskeletal labs as well. So please get familiar with this. Upper extremities include motor strength, flexion, extension. Now this is going to be a list of slides that, as I said, every time you do a strength testing, you're correlating specifically with usually a nerve group, okay? In this case, upper body motor strength testing, we're checking for elbow flexion or extension. Flexion is going to tell us C5, C6. Newer roots, if there's any kind of weakness, then we'll know where that's coming from. Extension involves spinal innervations of C6, 7, and 8. So please note the pictures and how you present and how you stand in front of the patient. And once again, we'll go through this in lab. You inform the patient exactly what you're going to be doing, you are allowed to do them symmetrically and bilaterally at the same time. Totally fine with that. For practice purposes, as you get familiar with, you can certainly start with one side at a time and then move into bilateral approach towards physical exam testing. But you want to check it bilaterally. I like doing it at the same time because if there's any kind of very subtle difference between a four out of five or a five out of five. You'll really notice that subtle difference as you do them simultaneously. So oftentimes, you can get a little bit better inference as to what the diagnosis is based on that. Again, moving on to the shoulders, the spinal nerve innervation is also C5, C6 in the axillary nerve. What we do here is we have a patient raise their arm. You can have them put their elbows straight out, and you have them, and you apply a resistance as they elevate their arm against your palm as you press firmly down. Again, for demonstration purposes, it's shown here unilaterally, but of course, as I said, totally fine as you get more comfortable to do this bilaterally as well. Here we go with the wrist, wrist flexion and extension. The flexion is innervated by six, seven of the median nerve. Having the patient make a fist and then having the patient flex their wrist down against resistance while you're pushing upward. As you can see, the upward arrow in the top picture is the examiner applying an upward resistance, and the downward arrow is the patient applying a downward resistance. So you can see how the two work together hand in hand. Extension, just the opposite. Now the instructor is applying a downward resistance with the patient resistance as it goes upward. And again, these can be done one-sided at a time. It's good practice that way. As you get better, you can start to do them symmetrically, especially if there's subtle differences that you're looking for to examine any focal motor weakness in the wrist. Finger motor strength can be done here. We have AD duction and AB duction. AD duction involves C78T1. And then here you simply have the patient has to squeeze your fingers as hard as they can and they'll let go. Finger AB duction, where you apply resistance as the patient spread their fingers and band them outward, and you're applying a resistance, bringing them together, having the patient try to prevent any movement that you do. Again, finger AB duction is CAT1, no longer. So really, these are great tests to help get confirmation. If you feel, for instance, there's an ulnar neuropathy or any kind of weakness, or slowing along the ulnar nerve, you want to determine where the lesion is. So you can test in different places. And one thing is a 10L sign, which we'll show you later on in the next lecture, where you tap on the elbow. And then, again, for confirmation sake, you can also test finger abduction, which is another branch of the ulnar nerve as well. Thumb opposition is very important. Motor strength for the spinal nerve roots. It innervates CAT1 in the median nerve. But for here, as you see in the picture, you have the patient touch the tip of your finger with their thumb against resistance. Very important to check for thumb opposition. Again, very, very important as it involves branches of the brachial plexus and other distal nerve roots from there on in. Let's go on to some lower extremity motor strength testing. We'll start with hip flexion and extension. Hip flexion involves nerve roots L2, 3, and 4. And as you can see demonstrated here, you have the patient line supplying on their back, and you have them tell them what you're doing, and you have them elevate their hip against resistance to your hand. And then this way, again, you can also test for strength testing from that. This is a little harder to do bilaterally at the same time, So kind of doing it side to side is the way to go with this and checking for motor strength testing here. Extension, same thing. You just put your hand underneath and you have them bear down or push down on your palm into the table. It's all in how you describe the patient doing it. Very simple and easy is one way to do it in this regard. So you can even have the patient, it's not demonstrated in this bottom picture. You can even have them slide to the edge of the table a little bit more and have them push down your hand that way. either way is preferable. Low extremity hip AD and AB duction, okay? Spreading out the hips and bringing them together. AD duction is coming together. So that's L2-3-4 in nerve root innervations. What we do is we place our hands on the inside of the knees and have the patient bring their legs together against resistance, check for the adductor muscles. And then secondly, the AB ductors, which is L45S1, you have the patient place your hands on the outside of the patient's knees and structure to spread their legs apart against resistance. A lot of different components here showing all the various examples. We will be practicing this all in lab. And once you get comfortable in doing this, it can be done very, very efficiently and not too much time needs to be taken. We've done very, very efficiently. Lower extremities, including motor strength testing of knee flexion extension. Straightforward, you have the patient sit up with their legs hanging over the table. Flexion includes spinal nerve roots L5, S1, and S2. Patient is instructed to pull or flex their leg against resistance. What you're doing testing is the hamstring muscles here. Those are those innervations. Extension will involve the quads, which is L2, 3, and 4. And this is where you have the patient. And I like to do it simultaneously, pushing against resistance into your hands. I like this simultaneously because oftentimes it's a very, very easy way to notice any subtle changes in any kind of weakness on one side versus the other. You may have five over five on the right leg, but the left leg would just be a little bit less like a four or four plus over five. So getting that subtle difference, it's a nuance, but you don't always get to easily pick it up. Unless you've done the test a thousand times, it's much easier to pick up when you're doing it simultaneously. Moving on to the ankles, we have two major motions we check for the ankles, dorsi and plantar flexion. Dorsi flexion involves the innervation of nerve root cell 4-5. It's where you have the patient lift their toes up against resistance, and then you apply a downward push. Plantar flexion involves S1, one of the more common nerve roots involved with back pain. So it's an important test to know and how to do. Nice and easy way to tell a patient is that you just have them push down on a gas pedal. Once you have them push down, you apply a gentle resistance and then you will know if there's any kind of weakness in that plantar flexion. Next, let's move on to coordination. So coordination for muscle movements requires the following. Motor system, which includes muscle strength. Vestibular system, which is a component of balance, coordination of eyes, head, and body movements. Sensory system, including position sense. And then the cerebellar system, finally, which integrates the information to produce normal rhythmic movements and steady posture. So coordination is just about one thing. It's very multifaceted. It's a combination of multiple things working at once. You know, a lot of times we tend to take these for granted. But really, it's quite an amazing system that the body has set up for us to always be on our toes. How do we assess coordination? Well, we observe patient performing various types of movements, and these are some of the tests that we're going to be doing in class. One of the tests is rapid alternating movements, which tests for diatokinesis. Now, what's diatokinesis? Excuse me. It's the ability to make antagonistic movements in a quick succession, alternately bringing a limb into opposite positions, such as flexion or extension or pronation and supination. The example we'll be using here is slapping your hand, supinating the pronating on one side versus the other side. If there is a lesion or the patient is unable to perform the feet, then that would be called dysdiatokinesis, where there is an actual deficit or inability for the patient to perform that rapid alternating movement. Another example of coordinating movements is point-to-point movement. Most commonly, what we use is finger to nose, and we'll go over that. And then some other gait and other related body movements we'll be covering as well. Okay. Let's start with rapid alternating movements. Like you said, the example I have here is rapid alternation of pronation of one hand with supination on the other. The fingers touch the thumb to each finger quickly. And you can see the example in the middle picture there where the patient is touching each finger to their thumb. One, two, three, four, one, two, two, three, four, and then repeat that very quickly. And then the legs, the patient can tap with the floor or examinations, hands with the ball, and look quickly, as you see here. Not all three needs to be performed. If you suspect difficulty or problems with the patient being able to complete one, then I would do a second. But the whole thing is at least pick one that you're comfortable with. And like I said, the rapidly alternating pronation and supination is one that's very easily reviewed and commonly used. And again, just observing for speed, rhythm, and smoothness of the movements. Here's an example of the point-to-point movements with both arms and legs. For the arms, we use finger to nose. You might have seen this in the past. You can see the patient is instructed to touch the physician's finger and then touch their nose. Each time that they do it, the physician or the examiner will move their finger to a different point in time, and the patient has to keep being able to coordinate, meaning touch their nose and touch the finger in the new location. And observing for smoothness and accuracy is important here. Patient unable to do this may have some deficit or lesion that needs to be further evaluated and assessed. Secondly, we have the legs, which is a leg heel shin movement, and we'll practice this in lab as well. Patient places one heel on the opposite knee and slide it down the shin of the other leg. They should be able to do this freely without any difficulty. Again, any kind of deficit should be followed up closely. Next, let's look at some gait techniques. What is gait? Gait analysis is so important, and it goes through a lot of different things. Determining how someone walks can tell you a lot about the type of diagnosis that they have. Unforwarded gaits can increase the risk of falls. It's so, so important, especially when you're dealing with the elderly population or people who are at risk knowing their living situation at home really need to do risk prevention. An uncoordinated gait can lead to unnecessary increased risk in falls and potentially worse, such as hip fractures, which can certainly significantly worsen a patient's morbidity and mortality. An ataxic gait, which is an uncoordinated gait, which is unstable, can be seen in some cerebellar diseases or even an intoxicated state or a loss of physician sense as well. How do we evaluate it? Well, one thing I like to do, and I always recommend to medical students to do this as you get more comfortable, especially in your preclinical rotations or if you're shadowing doctors, I love to see the patient walk in the room when they're not even knowing that we're paying attention. It's kind of like watching them from the third eye, right? Just watching them walk. They don't know they're being watched, but you can tell a lot about to see if there's any kind of, you know, limp or circumducted gait or any difficulty with them with transfers as well. But watching their gait is very vital to understanding their diagnosis. Watch them across the room down a hole. You're observing for posture, balance and swinging with the arms and leg movements. Normal intact balance, arms swing symmetrically at the sides and turns are smooth, okay? Another way we examine their gait is you have them tandem walk, meaning foot over toe, foot over toe in a straight line. The ability to do this can include some form of ataxia not otherwise seen, but it is important to demonstrate proper coordination in patients. Then you can also have them walk on their heels, toes on heels, hop in one place, or do a shallow knee bend. All these not only test a little bit of strength, but more importantly, the coordination and the ability for patients to independently ambulate and really being able to isolate those patients that are at risk for future falls. Okay, let's talk about some reflexes. This may be the earliest and most subtle indication of a neurological. Reflexes are an involuntary response to a sensory stimulus where abnormalities are difficult to simulate. So it's a really good test. You're going to be doing this a ton of times, not only practicing them in the lab over and over again, but you're going to be doing these on rotations. It doesn't matter what rotation you're on, from surgery to internal medicine to OB and down the line. I know you've got a couple of years to go, but it's important to keep these components that reflexes are going to be very prevalent in whatever type of physical exam skills you'll be performing. Reflexes can be motor, sensory, or autonomic. They can also involve a stimulation of receptors, such as skin, mucous membranes, muscle, periosteum, and retina, as well as viscera. And we'll go over the different types of reflexes. Some we will be performing in lab, and some we're just going to be discussing for obvious reasons, but I'll go into them later as well. What types of reflexes exist? One of the most common ones that we will be doing and testing in lab are the muscle stretch reflexes or the DTRs, the deep tendon reflexes. This is a protective function, especially with standing and walking, and involves specific spine segments and a simple monosynaptic reflex. Another form of a reflex is a cutaneous reflex, elicited by a superficial skin stimulus and occurs in the same general area. And then third type of reflex is primitive reflexes. We won't be really going into them now. We're going to be covering them in infant and pediatrics when we get to those lectures in the very near future. Reflexes are described and categorized in two ways. They're either increase or decrease, right? So increase we refer to as hyperreflexia or hyperactive reflexes. Hyperreflexia, as I sort of mentioned before, if you go back to your upper motor neuron lesions, is a lesion of the descending cortical spinal tract, which is a sign of an upper motor neuron lesion. That's the key clinical correlation here. When someone's hyperreflexic, it can indicate hyperreflexia, and it needs to be clinical correlated with the rest of the exam to determine the cause and diagnosis. Upper motor neuron lesions, findings of weakness, spasticity, or even a plasma bensky can also be found. So that's hyper. Hyporeflexia involves hypoactive or even absent reflexes. These are lesions of spinal nerve roots. They're lower motor neuron lesions, oftentimes involving spinal nerve plexuses, such as the brachial plexus or even peripheral nerves. Lower motor neuron lesions include weakness, atrophy, and as I said before, fasciculations, which is an irritated peripheral nerve root. How do we grade deep tendon reflexes? So you remembered your motor strength testing and the grading there. This grading is a little different, but it's very important to know because you're going to be using this in all your notations when you write SOAP notes for neurologic testing. The scale is graded from zero to four, okay? Two is average. So most times, if you're examining a patient with normal reflexes, you can simply say two plus bilateral, right? Four would be hyperactive, extremely brisk with possible clonus. Excuse me. So what's clonus? It's a rhythmic oscillation between flexion extension. Essentially, it's a neurologic condition that can also cause not just rhythmic muscle contractions, but also relaxations of the ankle joint. It's often triggered by a stimulus that can appear as a series of herky-jerky movements with a large, noticeable bounce. It's important. You won't see it often, but when you see it, you'll never forget it. So that's what a hyperactive or 4-plus reflex would look like. So 2 is average, 4 is brisk, 3 is a little bit more than average, but certainly not reaching that hyperactive state that I just described. And then finally, one is somewhat diminished than normal, lower than normal, and zero is absent reflexes. Again, they're documented one plus through four plus. Very important. We see this a lot, and please keep this in mind when you're practicing these skills in lab. A lot of times you'll see, oh, my God, Dr. Morgan, I can't get a reflex on this particular D10 reflex with a knee **** on the left or the right. The bottom line is you're going to see some patients that have physiologically low reflexes. It's very easy to have that. We're mostly looking for symmetry. If you see something that's way out of line or abnormal, everything also has to be clinically correlated. So you might have a patient who is completely normal, no significant medical history, but they come in and you notice they have decreased diminished reflexes, but it's symmetrical. No need to do any further evaluation if there's nothing else present on a physical exam. Here's an example of the reflex hammers you'll be using. These are all the different types we have. Most likely, you'll be using the one on the left. That comes with most of your kits that you purchased, although some of the other ones do contain the later models that you see in the middle on the right. Detailed reflex procedures. This could vary based on the different reflexes that we're testing, but we need to get the patient to relax. Most important, any kind of muscle movement or contraction can often diminish the reflex response. So the hammer needs to be held loosely between your thumb and dwarfing, or very lightly, like an arc. It needs to be able to swing freely within the limits of your palm and fingers. And we'll be practicing this plenty of times in lab, so you'll get a lot and a lot of practice with this. Now, using this technique listed below for patients who have symmetrically diminished traps and reflexes, meaning sometimes patients, no matter what you do, you can't get a response and you start to get freaked out. They're like, what do I do? So what we do is we try to use a distractor technique. This is going to be done in lab and we'll have one of the academic scholars actually demonstrate this on the stage. You distract the patient from muscle contraction by having them put their hands in a fist position, holding their hands. And then on a count of three, you have them pull apart and they just pull on their arms, as you can see, designated by the two black arrows in the bottom picture. As they're pulling apart on the count of three, not releasing, just pulling very tightly apart. that's when you elicit the knee reflex, as you see with the example with the hammer there on the patient's right knee. And you'll notice that if you've gotten over a reflex before, oftentimes you get a significant response. Students always love this because it's amazing when they're practicing it, they can't get a response. And then once you use this simple distracting technique, it often works very well. And again, we'll have plenty of time to practice assist in the lab. Biceps include the spinal nerve roots of C5 and 6. Again, the most important thing to know with the bicep is that you want to use your thumb and use it and place it on the bicep tendon when you're using the hammer. The reason for this is patient comfort, number one, and also sometimes the contractile response you get from the bicep tendon can be very subtle, and you may not actually see the arm flex, but you'll feel a mild contraction underneath your thumb. Either one is a normal response. So it's important to do this this way and do it bilaterally as well. Brachioradialis includes spinal nerve roots five and six. Again, this is about located one or two inches above the wrist. As you can see, no thumb is required. A simple tapping with the patient in the radial position, okay, thumb up, and a very light tap, and you'll see a nice little twitch with a radial deviation of the arm. Oftentimes, it can be very subtle, so you got to look for it very carefully. Deep tendon reflexes of tricep and quads. We have the tricep, which is nerve root six to seven. As you see in the picture, you have the patient relax with their arm flexed downward, and you have to completely isolate the tricep tendon as it inserts into the elbow. You apply in that arc that we described before, the hammer comes right on the insertion of where the tricep tendon, the tricep inserts into the elbow. And again, you assess it bilaterally. Next is the quads. Telereflex, spinal nerves, two, three, and four are involved. This is done with the patient generally sitting up, although it doesn't have to be. And as you can see, you want to isolate simply by having the patellar tendon tapped using the reflex hammer and doing that on bilateral. Again, if there's any kind of diminished response, you can use the distractor technique as I described before. Deep tendon reflexes on the ankle will involve nerve roots S1. This is where very, very important, especially for your testing when we do practical assessments in lab. Please note to always, always, always remove the shoes and socks. It's not just enough to pull it down a little bit. Any kind of clothing on that area can make it difficult to get or elicit even if it's a subtle response. And proper exam technique involves removing shoes and socks. The examiner will dorsiflex the patient's foot, and then the Achilles tendon is struck with the reflex hammer, you get a nice general response where the foot will kind of move in a plantar flexed or downward position. I mentioned before ankle clonus. This is tested when the reflex appears to be hyperactive. If you take the knee and support it in this position and you apply a dorsiflex response, you want to do it sharp very rapidly. What you'll notice is if clonus is present, And it'll have this sort of rhythmic muscle contraction and relaxation in an oscillating almost technique. Very, very classic when you see it. It doesn't happen a lot. But when you see it, you will never forget it. And this must be present in order to grade a stretch muscle reflexes or four plus. Some of the other tests that we do want you to be aware of, they can be done on rotations. But please keep in mind, we will not test them here. These are elicited by superficial skin stimuli and occur in the same general area. These include the **** reflex, the cremasteric reflex, and the abdominal reflex. Can anyone think of a diagnosis or some time where you actually do need to check one or more of these? I'll give you a minute. I'll give you five seconds. Okay. Well, one condition, and I, being a PM &R physician myself, one of the main tests we use these for is assessing level of paralysis in spinal cord injury. All these are very, very vital to determine the level of injury in a spinal cord patient. And oftentimes, we used to do either one or most commonly, so don't think they're not done. They're not done regularly, but they are very, very important to know, especially depending on the rotation and the diagnosis that you're trying to look for. Primitive reflexes, just a list. We're not going to be doing them at this time, but we will cover them in pediatrics. They're not present in adults. They're in childhood, and they can be also associated with diseases of the frontal lobe pathways, such as grasp reflex or pulmonary mental response, as well as the rooting reflex. I won't get into them any more than that, just to know that they exist. to really complete the reflex components, but we will get more into that with the pediatric lectures. Special technique. Okay, plantar response. Okay, this is what we're doing. We're going to be testing this. This is for an upper motor neuron leaching. Okay, you're taking the back end of your reflex hammer, the sharp end, let the patient know what you're doing. And what you're doing is, as you can see, the examiner strokes the lateral aspect of the sole of the foot from heel to the ball. They start down, they start all the way at the heel, and go to the ball of the foot, going down to upward. Okay, very, very important to follow that motion. Okay, what happens is in a normal response, the foot will naturally plantar flex, it'll move downward. If there is an upper motor neural response, and it's positive, there'll be dorsiflexion most commonly seen in the first toe. This Babinski response refers and most likely is indicative of a CNS cranial nerve lesion affecting the corticospinal tract. Does anyone know when this is normal in patients? Yeah. So, good. I'm sure most of you got it, that it is normal in children under a certain age usually less than a year old, usually even less than that. It's about six months, but it's a normal response that dissipates over time in children. One of the final special techniques includes the Hoffman test. This Hoffman test tests for upper motor neuron lesions above T1. You simply, as the picture demonstrates, you flick the nail of the middle finger, and if the thumb and second finger flexes, it's a positive test. It's almost like a pathological movement of those two fingers. So a patient has neurologic symptoms due to an upper motor neural lesion and not due to a reticulopathy or peripheral nerve lesion. Really, it's good to have a few of these upper motor neurons in your back pocket, especially if there is significant neuronal injury or diffuse axonal injury in the patient. Knowing if it's upper versus lower motor neuron, it's key to their diagnosis and treatment. And here are some special techniques that I mentioned we discussed before. This is a Romberg test. A Romberg test is a test of position sense, and we'll be demonstrating this in lab. Essentially, you have the patient, you're standing behind the patient, making sure they don't fall, so you're close by with your arms supporting on both sides without touching. And you have them put their feet completely together with their eyes open. And then if there's no loss of balance, you have them close their eyes for 30 to 60 seconds. If you notice any sway or loss of balance with the eyes closed, it could be a positive test or indicative of some dorsal column disease. OK, so really, really is important to make sure you pay close attention to patient safety in this test. Next special technique is the pronator drift test. Again, we'll be practicing this in lab with your eyes closed and you're standing in front of the patient. you have them move both arms straight forward with palm up and hold that position with their eyes closed for 20 to 30 seconds. Once that's done, without telling them, you do not tell them, you tap both arms briskly downward. You need to get a response. A normal response, their arms completely return normally to the position that you had when you started them with their arms straight out. Any kind of problem, if one arm and palm turned inward and down, as you can see in the bottom picture, that can also be indicative of a portico-spinal, tract, contralateral. So it's important to keep that in mind as well. So that's a positive test, but we'll be practicing this again as well. Finally, getting into documentation, as we did before in the first lecture, I'm just giving you a demonstration of documentation. This slide is your reference. You can see how things are written out from the mental status exam down to DTRs as we went over through before. And then you can go through that as well on your leisure. Here are some of the references we use. Bates has the best pictures as well as Dijon's neurologic examination. And finally, please make sure you come prepared to lab. Dress in appropriate CPR attire. Make sure you have those areas exposed, which you'll be examining for reflexes and whatnot. And make sure if we're doing the neuro labs, like we might be practicing the eye exam again to get as much practice as possible. Always keep your ophthalmoscope charged. Bring your visual acuity cards if you have, as well as penlight tuning fork and reflex hammer. And please make sure you review these skills. Sometimes these labs are very dense. We don't always have time to review every single skill, but we do our best to give you enough practice time. But it really is important for you to come to Lab Repair with a good sense of what we're going to be practicing. And the skill sheets are really champ -packed with a lot of good information for you. Not only does it have all the skills you need to know, but there's practice neurodocumentation and soap note documentation at the back of each package. So please review these as well as your CPG prior to the lab. And that brings us to the end. Thank you very much for your time. I will be back again for the final of three labs. three lectures, and I hope you all have a wonderful rest of your day.