Welcome students to our last lecture in our series on the Drugs Affecting the Autonomic Nervous System, the Pharmacology of Adrenergic Antagonists. Dr. Goldstein speaking. Please contact me if you'd like to chat. Here are our learning objectives. I'm sure you're getting used to them now. You need to be able to understand these pharmacokinetic properties of the classes and of the specific drugs that have STARS on them. You need to be able to understand epinephrine reversal and its clinical relevance. You should be able to talk about, explain, describe, make figures of the cardiovascular effects and reflex responses that occur when these various drugs are administered. Of course, mechanisms, mechanisms, mechanisms, and their effects. Relate the mechanisms of adverse effects and potential drug interactions of the individual agents to their cautions and contraindications for use. This is a clinical application of the pharmacology concepts. Here are the preparation materials, should you wish to use them. The practice questions are required. ScholarRxBricks, I'm sure you have found by now, can be very helpful. Preparation materials links and our key points. I'm not going to go over each and every one of these. It's here to give you sort of a preview into the lecture. You can use it as a study aid. I recommend that you make your own tables and figures and concept maps and and however you can make your studying efficient. Lots of key points boiled down here for you. This is a little concept map put together and published in the Goodman and Gilman text to show you how these are separated into their classes. Adrenergic antagonists inhibit the interaction of endogenous norepinephrine and epinephrine. That's the point. So they are inhibiting the sympathetic effects of these neurotransmitters. and they will also inhibit the effects of sympathetic sympathomimetic drugs when administered prior to them. We will talk about drugs that are non -selective and block both alpha 1 and alpha 2 adrenergic receptors and we're going to talk about epinephrine reversal. Alpha blockers block the vasopressor effects of epinephrine and narepinephrine. When we talk about alpha blockers we have to think about what's going to happen when we block those alpha receptors so we need to know what they do physiologically so on vascular smooth muscle they cause vasoconstriction so let's take this apart. The alpha-1 receptors cause vasoconstrictions throughout the vascular system, and they also cause constriction of visceral smooth muscle. Now, with regard to the alpha-2 receptors, we normally think about those as being inhibitory because they are, after all, the GI protein-coupled receptor types. They are basically widely expressed on presynaptic neurons, and by being on presynaptic neurons, their normal functions are suppression of sympathetic output and increasing of vagal tone and platelet aggregation, inhibition of the release of norepinephrine and acetylcholine from nerve endings, regulation of metabolic effects, which I'm not going to go into detail on in this lecture. But alpha-2 receptors are also located postsynaptically directly on some arteries and veins. Activation of these postsynaptic alpha-2 receptors on vasculature will lead to contraction of these vessels, vasoconstriction. The effect is less pronounced than we see with activation of alpha 1 receptors. Now these non selective alpha blockers are blocking both alpha 1 and alpha 2. Blocking alpha 1 clearly is going to prevent sympathetic induced vasoconstriction so lead to vasodilation, blocking alpha-2 receptors is going to block all of these presynaptic effects and this postsynaptic vasoconstrictive effect. So the non-selective alpha blockers will cause widespread vascular relaxation, vasodilation, And it will also block the presynaptic effects so that norepinephrine and acetylcholine are not inhibited from being released, not regulated, I should say, and in fact can be released. And if we think about the various effects on both the alpha-1 and alpha-2 receptors, we can more easily understand the actions of these non-selective alpha blockers. Class effects, epinephrine reversal, which I'll go into in detail. Cardiovascular effects, direct relaxation of arterial urinary venous. stone. That will decrease peripheral vascular resistance, decrease blood pressure. That's the point of them. So they are used for the treatment of hypertension. They were developed for the treatment of chronic primary hypertension. They are used as add-on agents. They are not first-line. Well I'll talk more about that later. And I mentioned that they block alpha-1 receptors on visceral smooth muscle, which is used to therapeutic advantage for relaxation of the smooth muscle tone in the prostate and bladder neck, and that will help improve the urinary symptoms of benign prostatic hyperplasia. Right here. What is the phenomenon described by these tracings? So let's have a look. Here we have phentolamine administered. Here's the initial blood pressure. We see a decrease in blood pressure. Here's the initial heart rate, we see an increase in heart rate. Here is epinephrine being administered into the vein of this experimental animal, which is an anesthetized dog. And we know that epinephrine going into the vein is going to have this vasoconstrictor effect as it activates the alpha receptors in the vasculature. And then over time we see this effect. And now phentolamine is given first, so it will block the alpha receptors, alpha -1 and alpha-2 because it's non-selective. And then epinephrine is given and this is what happens. So let's talk about it. This phenomenon is called epinephrine reversal. Epinephrine's presser effect converts to a depressor effect. How is this happening? Here we have the chart again. Here, phentolamine is administered prior to the epinephrine. So the effect, the pressor effect of epinephrine is blocked. Here's initial blood pressure, and here we see the blood pressure is lower. So what is happening? Well obviously it's blocking the alpha receptors. Think about what epinephrine does. Epinephrine will cause vasoconstriction by activating alpha receptors, but it will also cause vasodilation in the skeletal smooth muscle by activating beta 2 receptors located there. So two things are happening. Blocking of the alpha receptors prevents epinephrine from causing contraction of the smooth muscle in the vasculature, and at the same time, since these are alpha blockers, they have no activity on the beta receptors, and as a result, we have unopposed beta 2 vasodilation. So we get a depressor effect. effect. So let's further compare this to phenylephrine to help you see the net depressor effect of epinephrine. This is before alpha blockade on both of these, and phenylephrine is an alpha-1 selective vasoconstrictor, sympathomimetic. These curves look very similar as the drugs are introduced into the vein, and they cause activation of the alpha receptors in the vasculature and vasoconstriction. Now here is an alpha blocker is administered first, and then the sympathomimetic is administered afterwards. We saw on the previous slide that the vascular effect of epinephrine is blocked here. This is the alpha effect. And the beta 2 effect is unopposed. So we get this decrease here, and that's called a net depressor effect. Phenyloephrin, however, having only alpha-1 activity and no beta activity, we see that the alpha blocker will certainly block the vasoconstrictive effect, but it will not cause the net depressor effect. So that's the meaning of epinephrine reversal. Very interesting to study this in the laboratory. So what is the clinical application? Well, the alpha blockers are going to be blocking epinephrine's effect as well as, of course, norepinephrine's effect. So they're useful for the management of blood pressure. We'll begin with the non-selective alpha blockers. These were developed first, phenoxybenzamine actually has been around since 1952. It was the first one in the alpha blockers class and it found great therapeutic benefit for patients with hypertension and also for an adrenal tumor called pheochromocytoma. Phenthalamine was developed a little bit later, so let's compare these two. Phenoxybenzamine is only oral. Phenthalamine is only parenteral. I want to jump to the fact that phenoxybenzamine is an irreversible antagonist, whereas phenthalamine is just a competitive antagonist. The half -life of phenoxybenzamine is quite long, the duration is very long, whereas the phenolamine is quite short. Those are big differences there and that will also guide the therapeutic application of these drugs. So those are the main clinically relevant pharmacokinetic points. When you are looking at pharmacokinetic profiles, it's important to be able to pick out what is clinically relevant. What is important for optimizing therapy in your individual patient. This is just a little chart to remind you about competitive antagonists and irreversible antagonists. The competitive antagonists, we can see the curves are shifted towards the right, but the maximal effect still occurs, whereas with an irreversible antagonist, the maximal effect is decreased. And that's the point with phenoxybenzamine. These studies were done with drugs that are similar to our clinically used drugs. And that's all I'm going to say about this. I hope these charts will help you be able to visualize the differences in the pharmacodynamics of these drugs and the mechanisms. So what are the effects of these non -selective alpha blockers? Well, let's look at the cardiovascular actions. Alpha blockade causes relaxation of arterial and venous smooth muscle, causing vasodilation. Vasodilation decreases peripheral vascular resistance and, in fact, will decrease the main arterial pressure. And that, in turn, of course, as you remember, will cause reflex tachycardia. A simple concept that I know you're used to by now. The alpha-2 antagonistic effect is going to block the presynaptic alpha -2 receptors, the inhibitory effect, and that will allow norepinephrine release from presynaptic neurons, and that in turn will stimulate beta-cardiac receptors, which will contribute to the tachycardia. The urinary retention therapeutic use relaxes the smooth muscle of the prostate and bladder neck and that is going to relieve the urinary symptoms of benign prostatic hyperplasia as I mentioned before and it bears repeating. Phenoxybenzamine is used now mainly for the presurgical management of the hypertension and sweating associated with pheochromocytoma. Pheochromocytoma is a rare tumor of the adrenal glands. It's estimated at 0.8 per 100,000 person years, which may be an underestimation. But nonetheless, this is a basic concept you need to know, and you may actually be faced with a person who's presenting with hypertension, and pheochromocytoma may be on your differential list. Treatment of urinary symptoms. Phentolamine, intraoperative hemodynamic instability. We have other drugs also for this, but phyntalamine may still be an option. And you recall that it's got a rapid onset, rapid offset, and it's very effective. So those characteristics are what make it so suitable for intraoperative hemodynamic instability management. Also, some pressor agents, as we mentioned in those lectures, can leak out of the venous access and could lead to necrosis of the tissues at that area. So by blocking the alpha receptors in that area, by administering phenolamine by infiltration, that can be used as a treatment for the extravasation of the pressor agent. And it also has a dental application where it's infiltrated into the area in the mouth where the anesthetic was administered. Some local anesthetics are given with epinephrine to kind of hold it in place, hold that local anesthetic in place for a little bit longer because the epinephrine is causing vasoconstriction right there in that local area. So the phantolamine has developed for this dental purpose. Excuse me, push strong button. Vascular effects. Now, adverse effects. We need to be thinking about this. Orthostatic hypotension. What is that? That occurs when a patient who is susceptible to this effect rises from a lying down position to a sitting or standing position. when we do that and we are in a good healthy state our blood pressure goes up and it prevents the and it pushes blood back to the heart so it increases the cardiac output and that increases the blood to the brain and we feel fine but when a person has orthostatic hypotension either because he's got a neurologic condition, or because of alpha blockade on those veins when rising to the standing position, there is no vasoconstriction because it's blocked. And as a result, there is a decrease in the cardiac output because that blood is not being pushed back to the heart, and that can cause a decrease of blood to the brain, and that can cause syncope, fainting. Fainting causes falling, falling can cause injury. Additionally, we talked about the fact that we get a decrease in mean arterial pressure, which is going to cause a reflex tachycardia to try and push that pressure up. Now I know you haven't learned about the cardiovascular system yet and all of these reflexes. These are pretty straightforward concepts that you will be able to grasp at this time even though you haven't had a full cardiovascular lecture yet. It's just a matter of we're blocking the alpha receptors in the veins and arteries, and that's going to decrease the blood pressure, and if the mean arterial blood pressure drops, especially rapidly, then we have systems in our body to overcome that, to try and bring us back to homeostasis, to try and bring that blood pressure back up. And that is tachycardia, increase in the heart rate to increase the cardiac output, to increase the blood pressure. Simple as that. Now, non-vascular effects, these drugs do cross the blood -brain barrier, so it can cause some sedation and depression. They do block the midriatic effect of alpha receptors in the iris smooth muscle, and as a result you're going to get unopposed parasympathetic activation. So that causes meiosis. Nasal stuffiness because of the vasodilation in the nose, GI tract motility because we're blocking the alpha receptors in the gut, and impaired or retrograde ejaculation because of the block of the alpha receptors. Drug interactions. Well, other drugs that cause the same effect, other drugs that cause opposite effects. The drugs that cause the same effects, in other words, other antihypertensive drugs, these are alpha blockers or add -ons to them to increase the antihypertensive effect in patients who have not reached their blood pressure goals by using the first line combination agents. And then there are other drugs that are not used for blood pressure, but they have blood pressure lowering effects. So if we add them to those drugs, that's going to enhance blood pressure lowering, which may not be beneficial. Now I want to point out to you, because I'm sure you're thinking, well, I don't know anything about any of those drugs. Do I have to memorize them? And the answer is right down here. No, you don't have to answer. You don't have to memorize drugs that we haven't learned about yet. You do need to understand the mechanisms when the mechanisms are described to you. Now, of course, there are exceptions. Actually, no exceptions. What I want to point out is that these drugs with the check marks are included in our autonomic nervous system lectures. So you do need to remember about vasopressors and their mechanisms, amphetamines and their mechanisms, and beta blockers and their mechanisms. So let's talk about the alpha-1 selective drugs. These have far more clinical application in the management of blood pressure and the urinary symptoms of BPH. I put a star on the first ones in each group. Perazicin has the star on it. It is the prototype and representative of all of the class effects. These two, terazicin and doxazicin, are the ones that are actually used much more frequently in clinical practice. But they have the same effects. The only difference really is their pharmacokinetics. All of these are used in clinical practice, but they have the same mechanism and their effects are all very similar. And an alpha-2 selective drug, this is called Yohimbine. It has in the past been available by prescription many, many decades ago. It is frequently found in botanical products. Alpha-1 selective agents have far more affinity for the alpha-1 receptors, so much so that really they have very little effect on blocking the alpha-2 receptors. The quinazolanes, which is the prazosin group, are selective alpha -1 blockers, but they do block all of the subtypes. Tamsulosin, which is for BPH, has greater affinity for the alpha-1a and alpha-1d, but it is the alpha-1a that is of clinical interest because those are found to be expressed on the prostate smooth muscle and bladder neck smooth muscle. So what are they used for? Well, hypertension. Add -on, not first line. In fact, it's fourth, maybe fifth line. And why? Why is this? If they're so effective, I mean really, wouldn't we want to use them sooner than fourth or fifth line? The reason is because a particularly important clinical study called the ALHAT study found that the using doxazosin was more the patients who were on doxazosin were had a greater increase in morbidity and mortality so this is why they are have found their way to farther down on the list. So what do they do? Relax arterial and be in a smooth muscle, decrease total peripheral resistance, decrease preload, afterload. Preload, that means the drug is going into the atria and eventually finds its way into the ventricles and that's the preload point right there. Afterload is the pressure against the aortic vasculature. So that's afterload, it comes after the blood leaves the ventricles. And the ventricles have to push against that pressure. BPH, I've said this now, I think this is the fourth or fifth time, relief of the urinary symptoms. Now, Tamsulosin, which is the one that has a greater affinity for 1A than the 1B type of alpha receptors, does have less pronounced effect on blood pressure, and it is not used for blood pressure. It can still cause orthostatic hypotension, though. Speaking of which, First dose effect. This is an important concept. When patients are started on the alpha blocker, even though it's an add -on, their pressure tends to be high. And when they take that first dose and rise from a lying down position to a sitting or standing position, there can be quite a drop in blood pressure that can lead to the syncope. It can be severe. The patient can experience the palpitations and tachycardia. Tachycardia is important because it puts the stress on the heart. It increases what they call the work of the heart, which increases oxygen consumption. And in patients who have coronary artery disease, that can cause an angina attack. The first dose effect, the patient can experience dizziness, lightheadedness, and syncope or fainting, falling. So how is this managed? Just because there are adverse effects doesn't mean we don't try and mitigate them. We do, of course. So, if the patient takes it at bedtime, they will be sleeping during the peak blood levels, and in the morning, the blood levels will be much lower. Nonetheless, when they get out of bed, they need to be cautioned about this potential for the signs and symptoms of orthostatic hypotension. The other thing is it's called the first dose effect, but it may occur for several doses. So patients should be advised to take the first dose at bedtime, take it every day. If it's a once -a-day drug, take it at bedtime. Prazosin is taken more often, which is one reason why it's not used so much. it's a patient adherence issue. When they're taking it strictly for BPH, such as with Tamsulosin, then they still need to be cautioned about this effect. Now another strange thing that was unanticipated but discovered in post-marketing surveys is something called intraoperative floppy iris syndrome, which of course received an acronym. It occurs during cataract surgery. The ophthalmologists were finding that when patients who had been on an alpha blocker, mainly tamsulosin, this was first observed with this drug, were having difficulties with the cataract surgery because of this floppy iris syndrome. They now have strategies for managing it. Stopping the drug in advance doesn't help. And the reason is because it causes relaxation in the iris dilator muscle. Non-vascular adverse effects, sedation, depression, meiosis, meiosis because of the alpha blockade, preventing medriasis, nasal stuffiness because of the vasodilation in the nasal mucosa. It kind of blocks up the nares. Increased GI motility. And now, Tamsulosin has a specific one. It's got a sulfonamide moiety on it. So patients, this is out of an excess of caution. Patients who have a sulfonamide allergy should not receive Tamsulosin. Patients who did report a sulfonamide allergy were not included, they were excluded from the clinical trials with Tamsulosin. Now Yohimbine or Yohimbibark you may see on the label. Competitive alpha 2 selective adrenergic receptor antagonist. It has central effects, it crosses the blood-brain barrier. It increases the blood pressure, increases the heart rate as you would anticipate. It enhances motor activity. It causes tremors. It is believed to be a ****** stimulant. It has stimulating effect on the mood. The clinical trials for increasing ****** and improving erectile dysfunction are not very well controlled, so we can't really say with certainty what the clinical effects of Yohanbeam are as an aphrodisiac. As expected, tachycardia, hypertension, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, salivation, which is cholinergic M3, but it's still sympathetic. This is an endocrine action in the pituitary. Tremors, sweating, headache, agitation, anxiety, irritability. And it's over -the-counter. It's not FDA-approved. Anything over-the -counter is not rigorously analyzed by the FDA because that's just the way the rules are so patients take it on their own so if a patient is presenting with these this constellation of effects of complaints would be good to ask if they're taking any botanicals as well as other drugs of course and put it on your differential list some questions now I invite you to pause your computer and think about these how does the concept of epinephrine reversal explain antihypertensive actions of alpha blockers what is the reason and of course mechanism for advising patients to take the first dose of a selective alpha blocker at bedtime. And finally, selective inhibition of which adrenergic receptor type, listed here, leads to this constellation of effects. Tachycardia, hypertension, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, salivation, tremors, diaphoresis, headache, agitation, anxiety, irritability. And what's the name of the drug? So, I'm figuring you're back now and you've thought of these and maybe you look back on the PowerPoint. Blocking vascular alpha adrenergic receptors prevents Epi's vasoconstrictive actions leading to vasodilation, and its beta-2 mediated vasodilation is unopposed, contributing to the antidepressive actions of the alpha blockers, causing a net net depressor effect. What is, okay, the next one, the first dose or first few doses may cause orthostatic hypotension because when rising from a lying down to upright position, reflex vasoconstriction is blocked. And finally, the drug, of course, is Yohimbine, a selective alpha-2 adrenergic receptor blocker that can potentially cause all of these effects. Dose-related, dose -related, dose-related. Moving now to the beta receptor antagonists. Everybody always calls them beta blockers. beta blockers. That's what we're talking about. And there are quite a bunch of them. You may have noticed that on that little mind map at the beginning underneath the beta blocker large category. They come, the so -called classical non -selective beta blockers, so beta 1 and beta 2, the beta 1 selected beta blockers, which at high doses lose their selectivity, and then there are the various types with additional actions. I've put stars on this chart. These are the two that at this time is all you need to remember. Later on, you'll be asked to understand and describe, be able to describe, be able to explain all of these other features. I have them here for context. I don't want you to think that if I just put these top two, that's all there is. It isn't. So the various beta blockers will have two or maybe three of these actions, they don't have all of them. So they are either competitive antagonists and some of them have been found to be inverse agonists. I'm just bringing that up. The point is the inverse agonist has the same effects as the competitive antagonist. so I want you to remember the competitive antagonist and the non -selective versus the selective effects, that's it. Okay, we have another group of tracings here demonstrating an effect. Here we have administration of epinephrine alone. This is cardiac contractile force, so the force of contraction on the atria and the ventricles. We see a spike as epinephrine causes that increase in force, causes that contraction. We have the effect on arterial pressure, which you saw before. And we have our increase in our heart rate. We know that epinephrine causes all these effects. Here propranolol, which is the prototype of this group, is administered, and then after that epinephrine is administered. So propranolol blocks beta-1 and beta-2. So the contractile force is blocked by blocking the beta -1, beta-2 receptors. The arterial pressure is not blocked because the alpha receptors are not blocked. And the heart rate again that is a beta 1 effect. This is blocked. So beta blockers block the cardiac effects but not the arterial effects. But by decreasing the force of contraction, decreasing the heart rate, beta blockers are going to decrease the cardiac output, in other words the amount of blood that's being pushed out of the left ventricle in a unit of time. So that will increase and that, sorry it's going to decrease that, so that will in turn decrease the blood pressure. So that's how beta blockers work. And we have it laid out here. I put in the box the takeaway. This is the big picture idea with beta blockers. They slow the heart rate, they slow the rate of conduction through the atrial ventricular node, and they decrease the force of contraction. That will decrease the cardiac output. which decreases the blood pressure. And here are the mechanisms. It has a negative chronotropic effect, in other words, it slows the sinus rate. The sinoatrial node generates the electrical signals that set the normal rhythm and rate of the heart. So that's slowed down. It decreases spontaneous rate of depolarization of ectopic pacemakers. Now this is the reason for its antiarrhythmic effect. It reduces the contractility and that's called negative inotropic effect. It slows the conduction in the atria and the AV node and that will increase the PR interval on the ECG, which I have a picture of that for you. And it will increase the functional refractory period in the AV node because it is slowing the conduction. That's the point of it. So those are the mechanisms. This is the takeaway. Now, we're talking about the non-selective ones. You're probably thinking, well, if we block beta 2 receptors, isn't Isn't that going to block the beta-2 vasodilatory effect in the skeletal muscle, and that would be a great way to think about it. So yes, it does at first, at first, but that is a short-lived thing. Long term, the non-selective beta blocker, the total peripheral resistance returns to the initial value and it can even decrease in patients with hypertension because we're getting a reset. So that's the idea with the non -selective beta blockers being effective in the management of elevated blood pressure, hypertension. Now the renin -angiotensin system, this is probably something you remember from somewhere. This is a hormonal system. It's much slower to respond to changes in blood pressure, but it does respond, and it's intended to bring us back to homeostasis, and that occurs when the blood pressure drops. When blood pressure drops, then renin is released, and renin causes eventually the synthesis of angiotensin II, which is a powerful systemic vasoconstrictor. So that's good when our blood pressure drops and we need this vasoconstrictive effect. Now, renin release is also stimulated by beta 1. So when there is a sympathetic increase in tone, that will stimulate the cardiac effects, that will cause the vasoconstriction, and that will stimulate renin release through beta 1. So when we block beta 1, we are blocking that sympathetic stimulated release of renin. Now, renin can be released by other ways, but we're talking about the sympathetic effect causing the release of renin, which is blocked by the beta blockers. That's it. The takeaway, the mechanisms, and don't forget about those renin release in the kidney. This is a kidney effect. Here are the pictures. This is just a reminder of the sympathetic innovation of the heart. And that's with all of these here. You can see the paravertebral ganglia. And here we have our vagal effect. So, the vagus will decrease the rate of sinoatrial firing, so decrease heart rate, decrease speed of conduction through the atrioventricular node, and also decrease the force of contraction in the atria. It's got very little innervation of the ventricular parts of the heart. Here we have our sinoatrial node, here we have our AV node, left atrium, right atrium, left ventricle, right ventricle. And this whole thing is indicating the electricity running through the conduction system. Here's are EKG, this is a normal EKG tracing or just one little piece of it, representation. P-wave is in the front. P-wave is, this bump here indicates the depolarization of the atria, atrial contraction. So that gets slowed by use of a beta blocker. Therapeutic uses. I put some light colors on this to indicate, first of all, these are the main cardiovascular effects that we think about with the beta blockers. These are a couple of other therapeutic uses that are managed because of the cardiovascular effects of beta blockers. And these are the non-cardiovascular uses of beta blockers. So hypertension, decreased cardiac output, blood pressure, decreased renin release. Angina pectoris, this is chest pain, in patients who have coronary artery disease. By decreasing the work of the heart, decreasing the heart rate conduction and contraction, force of contraction, that's going to decrease oxygen consumption. So they're very useful for the management of exertional angina pectoris. Acute myocardial infarction. This is based on excellent clinical studies showing the improvement in morbidity and mortality when a beta blocker is given early in acute myocardial infarction. Congestive heart failure, again, based on excellent clinical studies showing a benefit in morbidity and mortality, has to be done very carefully and only in patients with compensated heart failure. Certain types. Arrhythmias, they are antiarrhythmic for the treatment of various arrhythmias. hyperthyroidism this is what happens with when people have consistently elevated levels of thyroid various metabolic things occur and one of them is an upregulation of cardiac beta receptors so there are more beta receptors expressed on cardiac tissues and this can result in tachycardia palpitations, this kind of tremor feeling, tremulousness, anxiety. So use of beta blockers is recommended for management of these symptoms. Esophageal varices, these are varicose veins in the esophagus as a result of hepatic cirrhosis. And hepatic cirrhosis causes an increase in portal hypertension. So certain of the beta blockers have been shown to decrease the portal hypertension and importantly decrease the incidence of bleeding from these varicose veins and decrease mortality in patients with hepatic cirrhosis. Glaucoma, this is an effect on the ciliary body which forms the aqueous humor. So using our beta blocker will decrease aqueous humor formation, which will decrease the pressure in the eye. Migraine prophylaxis, performance anxiety. This doesn't work for everybody, but for people that it does work for, they take it regularly to help reduce the intensity and frequency of the migraines. Stage fright, performance anxiety, getting the palpitations and the shakiness, so giving a beta blocker an hour or so before the performance can reduce these somatic symptoms of anxiety. Adverse effects, fortunately most of them are minor. bradycardia can occur, and so that needs to be monitored. Bronchospasm, this is the beta-2 block, so we're talking about the non-selective, and don't forget, higher doses of the beta-1 selective tend to lose their selectivity. So anybody with a obstructive disease in which bronchospasm can reduce their ability to breathe like asthma, COPD, the recommendation is to avoid the non-selective beta blockers, and maybe beta blockers in general. Also, blocking beta 2 can mask the symptoms of hypoglycemia, and these symptoms are tachycardia, shakiness, anxiety. So in patients who are prone to hypoglycemia, which would be insulin-dependent patients, patients taking certain and type 2 diabetes patients taking certain hypoglycemic agents are especially likely to develop to have these symptoms masked and as a result they won't notice the hypoglycemia and the hypoglycemia can be dangerous. Additionally, blocking beta 2 can inhibit the reflex hepatic production of glucose which would then raise blood sugar. So these two things masking and preventing the production of glucose lipid the hepatic production of glucose. Some lipid abnormalities are always mentioned in the literature. So it's a matter of monitoring. And these CNS features have been described ever since the very first beta blocker was developed decades ago. Fatigue, depression, ****** dysfunction, some other CNS effects. These have been examined in studies over these many years. The studies tend to be poor, so this is going to be a patient-specific effect. Many patients tolerate beta blockers very well. Now, slow withdrawal. Slow. Slow tapering. Because going back to are basic pharmacodynamic concepts. When a patient, when a person is taking a drug that blocks receptors over time, chronically over time, then the tissue that is subject to these blocked receptors is going to express more of these receptors. So abrupt withdrawal of of the drug can lead, of the beta blocker, can lead to hypertensive rebound. We call that rebound hypertension. Severe hypertension, and if the patient has coronary artery disease, they can suffer chest pain, possibly a myocardial infarction, possibly an arrhythmia, possibly a risk of increased risk of sudden death and this is due to the super sensitivity that occurred because of this adaptive upregulation of the beta receptors mitigation taper the dose of beta blocker over several weeks we talked about this also with clonidine and if the two are used together the beta blocker must come off first, BB first, so that the alpha receptors are not unopposed. If the clonidine comes off first, then the alpha receptors are exposed, and we know beta blockers don't block those. contraindications you can anticipate them asthma hypersensitivity of course with everything all right pregnancy what's the deal with that the drugs do cross the placenta other antihypertensive agents are preferred and there is one exception and this is libetalol which is used for the management of chronic hypertension and also acute hypertension in the pregnant patient. I do not have a star on on it this time when we talk about anti hypertensives. I will have a star on it at that point. Drug interactions you could anticipate them. Other anti hypertensive drugs. Calcium channel blockers could increase the risk of heart block. I'm not going into that detail for this lecture. It is a very important detail for a later time. They are metabolized by CYPs. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs like naproxen, Aleve, like ibuprofen will increase sodium and water retention because that's just what they do. and that can attenuate the antihypertensive effect. And other drugs that increase or decrease blood pressure. So that's it in a nutshell. Some questions. How do the beta blockers inhibitory effects on cardiac cells reduce blood pressure? What is the mechanistic thread that connects all the therapeutic uses of the beta blockers? How does the mechanism of action describe the mechanisms of adverse effects associated with beta blockers? So I invite you to pause your videos and give it some thought. Assuming you're back now, the first one is beta blockers decrease cardiac output by decreasing heart rate, slowing the rate of conduction through the AV node, and decreasing the force of contraction. And I should put on here too, because I forgot, beta 1 block blocks renin release. Beta blockers inhibit the stimulating effects of the sympathetic nervous system on beta adrenergic receptors. It's as simple as that. So, it's various therapeutic uses are all related to blocking the stimulating effects of the sympathetic nervous system on the beta receptors. Adverse effects, they can all cause bradycardia in patients who are particularly susceptible to it. of course they're slowing the heart rate. Bradycardia is a deep slowing of the heart rate. There are different definitions of it. Some say less than 60, some say less than 40, 40 or so. So it depends on the definition. But they all can potentially cause bradycardia because that's what they do. Blocking the beta -2 receptors can exacerbate lung disease, asthma, COPD, and potentiate or mask systems of hypoglycemia. And the drugs propranolol and metoprolol, or metoprolol, both pronunciations are used. Propranolol is non-selective, metoprolol is beta -1 selective, so that's why these two are chosen. The clinically relevant pharmacokinetic properties are oral, they're both oral, but metoprolol can be given IV in case we need too rapidly, or not too rapidly, to bring down the blood pressure in a very hypertensive patient. They cross the blood-brain barrier, both of them, we see CYPs involved, but metoprolol here we have CYP2D6. So remember our pharmacogenomics, which I'm not going to go into now, just you might want to review that and remember CYP2D6. the bioavailability is adequate it happens with the immediate release should be taken on an empty stomach in order to get blood the consistent blood levels with each dose it's only 25 percent if taken with protein rich foods it's higher and therefore that's why the recommendation of the the empty stomach, just to have consistent blood levels. Propranolol, three to six hours. Metoprolol, around four hours. Longer and poor metabolizers. Both of these come in extended-release formulations so that they're much more convenient for the patient and help to improve adherence to the drug therapy. and finally here is that that little chart again look at all of these various drugs underneath the big headings which is why i'm there's i absolutely you don't need to memorize all of these not necessary when you get into to your clinical rotations you look them up you should know your pharmacology well enough to read a monograph and quickly understand what it's telling you. Briefly, we have our alpha blockers, relaxing vascular smooth muscle and decreasing peripheral vascular resistant. We talked about epinephrine reversal as being a predictable effect of alpha blockade. We talked about our beta blockers, reducing heart rate, conduction velocity, force of contraction, and cardiac output. They both reduce blood pressure by their various mechanisms. They're sometimes put together also because they have these two mechanisms that do work well together. Non-selective alpha blockers are phenoxybenzamine and phenolamine. Phenoxybenzamine is used primarily for the presurgical management of pheochromocytoma. Surgery is curative for pheochromocytoma. Phantolamine is rapid-acting, short -term use, intraoperative, severe hypertension. It's also used for reversal of extravasation of pressor agents and for reversal of local anesthesia containing epinephrine for dental use. Alpha blockers are add-on agents, beta blockers, are also add-on agents for hypertension. Alpha blockers are used for managing urinary symptoms of BPH. Alpha blockers causes first-dose effect, intraoperative floppy iris syndrome, meiosis, nasal stuffiness, and impaired or retrograde ejaculation. Beta blockers have prominence effect in the heart, decreasing chronotropy, inotropy, and suppressing renin release from specialized cells in the kidney. These are called juxtaglomerular cells because they're next to the glomerulus at the afferent renal arteriole, the one going into the glomerulus. We've got a whole bunch of beta blockers that are used. Treatment of a number of cardiovascular diseases, arrhythmias, effort angina, acute myocardial infarction, congestive heart failure, add -on hypertension. So hypothyroidism, esophageal varices, migraine prophylaxis, stage fright. Adverse effects, bronchospasm, bradycardia, decreased cardiac output, which is actually their blood pressure lowering effect, but that can be harmful in certain patients. hypoglycemic effects, masking hypoglycemia, lipid abnormalities, depression, fatigue, ****** dysfunction have been reported. So that's it. Pretty straightforward. You can put this all on a couple of figures on one page to help you be more efficient in your studying. And that concludes includes our whole series on the pharmacology of drugs affecting the autonomic nervous system.