Hello, folks. Welcome to the neuroanatomy lecture on blood -brain barrier, meninges, CSF, and ventricles. My name is Vinci Matthew. I am one of your academic medicine scholars on the research track. Some of you guys know me from last semester. And I want to thank Dr. Grubashek, who has given me the opportunity to give this lecture and mentor me through this. So in this lecture, we'll cover a broad variety of topics. I know neuroanatomy is this huge topic that some of you guys might fear, but I have tried to make this lecture as simple as it can be and made it clinical, which I guess keeps everybody kind of focused and also prepares you for the boards. Here are my references. I want you guys to focus on the Nolte's, the human brain, which is your primary source for neuroanatomy, and the first aid, USMA Step 1. So this is when you guys should kind of start using your first aid with the lecture studying, just so that you guys get familiar with the terms used, and just the book in general. I have also included a picture of the first aid in the corners of certain slides that just means that those slides are heavily tested on step one and level one as well as those will be more clinically relevant stuff that you guys might see in the comp as well here are your session objectives um i would read through it by yourself but they're self-explanatory if you guys are able to go through this at the end of the lecture and say yep, got it, got it, got it, got it, then you are good to go for my lecture. So I want to start the lecture by looking at a clinical question. I'll have some questions throughout that we'll come back to. So take a minute, read this question, and we will come back to it. So we'll start by talking about various central nervous system barriers. So these are two very rudimentary but yet informative pictures that gets you guys thinking of the level of microscopic anatomy and physiology we'll cover in the next few sides. So in this left picture that we have, you see the brain kind of being protected by this invisible glowy barrier. So this barrier may be invisible. When I talk about barrier, I'm talking about blood-brain barrier. It maybe is invisible, but it plays a critical role in maintaining the delicate environment within our central nervous system. It protects our brain from potential harm while carefully regulating what can and cannot enter. So you can imagine it as being a security checkpoint so advanced that it screens every single molecule that enters your brain, allowing nutrients, essential compounds to pass while blocking out harmful agents. That's essentially the job of what blood-brain barrier does. It's a structure built with purpose, evolved over millions of years to protect our most vital organs. And there are three different barriers that we'll cover in the next couple of slides. So essentially, there are three different central nervous system barriers. We have the blood-brain barrier, the blood cerebrospinal fluid barrier, and the arachnoid barrier. All organisms with a well-developed central nervous system have a blood-brain barrier. In the brain and the spinal cord of mammals, including humans, the blood-brain barrier is formed by endothelial cells that form the walls of the capillaries. A second interface is formed by the epithelial cells of the choroid plexus facing the cerebrospinal fluid which constitutes the blood CSF barrier as you can see in this picture. And the third interface is provided by the avascular arachnoid epithelium which underlies the dura in the arachnoid membrane, the arachnoid matter, and completely encloses the CNS. So these three layers completes the seal between the extracellular fluids of the the central nervous system, and the rest of the body. So basically, separating the interstitium of the brain from the blood. So what exactly is the blood-brain barrier? Well, it is a selectively permeable, semi-permeable membrane between the blood and the interstitium of the brain. and it is composed of three main structures. You have the endothelial cells, so here is a schematic of the blood -brain barrier and this is the longitudinal view. So this side is the apical side of the lumen of the blood vessel and this is the brain interstitium. So we're trying to prevent movement of stuff from inside the blood into the blood vessel into the brain interstitium. So going from lumen of the blood vessels into the interstitium, we have three structures that are important to understand. We have the endothelial cells, you have the pericytes, You can see it here in the green and in the green here. And you have the astrocyte end feet in the blue here and the blue here. And you also can see the glial cells, the astrocytes, microglia, neurons. They also participate in forming the blood-brain barrier from the interstitial side, all of which their job is to shield the brain from toxic substances, filter harmful compounds from the brain to the bloodstream, and supply brain tissue with nutrients. The key feature of the blood -brain barrier is your tight junctions, or the zona occludens. These are located between the cerebral endothelial cells, so you can see in this schematic, you see the ZO3, ZO2, ZO1, those are your zona occludens, and they significantly reduce the permeation of polar solutes through the paracellular divisional pathways between the endothelial cells from the blood plasma to the brain extracellular fluid. Here on the right is a transmission electron microscope of the two endothelial cells side to side, and you can see this tiny opening. It's basically the tight junction that's connecting them, patching them together, essentially completely restricting that paracellular motion of ionic solutes and big macrosolutes. And you have the cloudin and occludin transmembrane proteins, which are involved as well, and they're connected to the cytoskeleton through the zona occludins. there are various disease processes that breaks down the blood -brain barrier so if you compare the schematic here the healthy blood-brain barrier versus the blood-brain barrier breakdown you see that there are different processes involved so you have the altered paracellular and trancellular transport decreased tight junction protein expression so you can imagine those If the tight junctions does not exist, then there is an increased paracellular transport. You have detached and swollen astrocytes, demyelination of the neurons, basement membrane thinning, activated microglia, which basically eats up some of the cells, destroyed cells. So these are different processes to the cell components that make up the blood-brain barrier. And we see all of these in different states, such as tumor, which can cause that inflammatory response, and vasogenic edema. Anytime you have edema around the brain, it kind of stretches that tight junction, and you're basically kind of opening it up at that gap. So then there's more of that paracellular transport that happens. There's also angiogenesis during the tumor, where the new blood vessels essentially permeate through the blood-brain barrier, breaking it down. during traumatic brain injury, it can either be an actual insult to the blood-brain barrier, breaking it up, or the inflammation that ensues. During multiple sclerosis, you have the demyelination of the central nervous system. Thus, you're kind of losing that extra protective layer. Alzheimer's disease, you have the deposition of beta amyloids, again, causing that inflammatory response. Intraventricular hemorrhage, also causing that edema process, stretching the tight junctions. So all of these then destroys that sterile environment of the brain, wherein you have the CSF, which is inside the, within the blood-brain barrier. The CSF is a ultrafiltrate of the plasma of the blood. So then when you have that breakdown of blood-brain barrier, you see a normalization of the contents within CSF and plasma of the blood which is never good because now the brain is not sterile anymore. Now that we have gone through the contents of the blood-brain barrier and some of the disease states that does damage these, coming back to this question, it should be clear that the answer is zona occludens or the tight junctions that we talked about. The blood-brain barrier is generally a lipophilic or hydrophobic barrier. So it generally only allows lipid -soluble substances into it. There are some exceptions where it does allow very tiny positively charged molecules. So the idea is the more lipid-soluble a substance, the more permeability it will have for the blood -brain barrier. And this concept is very important for pharmacology. An example I have here is the use of levodopa in Parkinson's disease. So Parkinson's disease, as you guys know, is a disease of decreased dopaminergic neurons in your substantia ***** pars compacta. So the treatment for it is to deliver dopamine into the central nervous system. However, as you can see here, dopamine is a polar substance, but adding a carboxyl group into dopamine makes it levodopa and makes it non-polar. So that's actually what we use for the treatment of Parkinson's disease. So the levodopa being non-polar can ********* the blood-brain barrier and can go into the brain and then inside it, inside the brain, there is a decarboxylate that converts into dopamine and can then be delivered and used as a treatment. Another example is the use of or the lack of use of aminoglycosides in meningitis. Meningitis is often caused by, in adults, gram -negative organisms. And as you guys know, aminoglycoside is a great drug for gram-negative bacteria. However, you'll never see aminoglycosides being given for meningitis because it is a highly polar substance and will not be able to ********* the blood-brain barrier enough to treat the bacteria. So what we see being used is vancomycin plus ceftriaxone, both of which has lipid solubility and can thus ********* the blood-brain barrier and treat meningitis. So you guys might be wondering why we go into the details of the cellular parts of the blood-brain barrier. This is why. You need to understand why the clinical medicine that we do is the way it is. Here's another clinical question. Pause the lecture and see if you can answer it. We will come back to it. We talked in length about how the blood-brain barrier fully covers the brain and protects the interstitium of the brain from the blood. But there are special regions that lack the blood-brain barrier, and these are called the circumventricular organs. These include the median eminence here that's posterior to the hypothalamus. You have the posterior pituitary, also called the neurohypophysis. You have the organum vasculosum of the lamina terminalis, situated in the wall of the lamina terminalis, which is basically the anterior wall of the third ventricle. You have the sub -fornical organ, which is posterior to the fornix, aptly named. You have the pineal gland, which is a gland that secretes the melatonin and creates the circadian rhythm. And finally, you have area postrema situated in the caudal medulla. And these regions, because they lack the blood-brain barrier, are prone to rapid transmission of biochemical influences. So we'll talk about how some of this affects us in general. So it's important to understand what these structures are and their physiology, because during certain contrast -enhanced imaging, so for example, in this MRI flare with contrast, you can see on the left side, there is some contrast enhancement. So these white areas that you're seeing that are lighting up. So if you don't know what these structures are, now you know these are the circumventricular organs. So you have the subfornical organ, the organovascularism of the lamina terminalis, median eminence, neurohypophysis, and the pineal gland. Because they don't have the blood-brain barrier, you can have contrast enhancement that you wouldn't see in other places. And if you didn't know what these structures were and that they lacked blood-brain barrier, you could mistake them for actual pathology during your radiological imaging. This actually happened to me where pineal gland generally gets enhanced during MRI because of its lack of blood-brain barrier, and I thought that was a neoplastic enhancement. So again, important to understand the anatomy and the cellular physiology of these organs. One of the more important circumventricular organs for you guys to know for the exam and for the boards in general is area postrema, also called the emetic center. Emesis means vomiting. So the area postrema located in the caudal medulla is our emetic center. So molecules that are given in the periphery that are toxic or can induce emesis, it can pass through because there's no blood-brain barrier in the area postrema. it can bind there and induce the vomiting reflux. So we talked about how levodopa is given for Parkinson's treatment as it can cross the blood-brain barrier. However, in the perforate, often levodopa can be converted into dopamine because there are decarboxylase in the perforate, and it can thus get converted into dopamine and bind to the area postrema. And dopamine is an emesis -inducing agent, so it can bind to the dopaminergic receptors and cause emesis. And this often happens in about 30% of the patients who, Perkinson's patients who take levodopa. So what we can do is add carbidopa, which is a decarboxylase inhibitor in the perforate. Thus, the levodopa stays as levodopa and doesn't get converted to dopamine and help relieve the nausea and vomiting that happens through the binding in area pastrema. so now you guys should be able to answer this question without any difficulty so the circumventricular organ that we're talking about here is area postrema we talked about the blood csf barrier which is formed by the epithelial cells of the choroid plexus also called the specialized epindymo cells which is a type of glial cell so here we have the csf lumen inside And then you have the choroid plexus epidemal cells that, again, has that tight junctions creating a seal between the adjacent epithelial cells. And then you have the lumen of the blood vessel. So what happens in hydrocephalus, especially chronic hydrocephalus, hydrocephalus is a buildup of CSF within the ventricles. We'll talk about it in the coming slides. So this ventricle, I don't expect you guys to look at it and see that this is hydrocephalus. But over time, you'll be able to pick that up. You'll look at this MRI and see, okay, this ventricle is large. You have ventriculomegaly. And that's because there is buildup of hydrocephalus. There's buildup of CSF. It's not flowing properly. And what happens is that because there's so much fluid buildup, it stretches that tight junctions of the epithelial cells of the choroid plexus, the ependymal cells. So that creates a leaky paracellular CSF flow into the brain parenchyma. And what ends up happening is that when you look at the MRI, especially, you almost see like an enhancement around the ventricles. And that's basically fluid, the CSF flowing through the ependymia into the parenchyma. So that's just edema that you're seeing, and that's called the trans-ependymal CSF flow. This is a classic pimping question you'll see in your neurology or neurosurgery rotation. Now we'll switch gears and talk about different layers from superficial to deep, starting from the scalp, the skull, different layers of the meninges, and then the different compartments, intracranial compartments, where we can have potential bleeds. So starting with the scalp, the scalp is the skin and the subcutaneous tissue that covers the neurocranium, the skull. It has five layers that you can use the mnemonic scalp, S -C-A-L-P, to memorize. And the five layers, all of which combined, has great vascular supply, which explains why when you have a small cut or laceration, it bleeds profusely. So the most outer layer is the skin that is usually covered with hair and has great vascular supply. As you go in, you have the subcutaneous tissue or the connective tissue, which is a thick layer, again, with vascular supply. um going in you have what's called the galea aponeurosa um this might be a newer word but that's it's basically the aponeurosis of the muscle muscular layer um uh where the muscles the aponeurosis of the muscles attach um and this is the strongest layer of the of the skin of the scalp um and um afterwards going deeply you have the loose connective tissue which is basically a sponge -like layer of air roller tissue. It allows free movement of the first three layers over the underlying pericranium, which is now the deepest portion of the scalp. The pericranium, also called the periosteum, is a dense fibrous connective tissue that overlays the skull. So anytime you do any kind of neurosurgical procedure, you cut through all of these layers and when you're trying to put the sutures back up you actually do two different layers. You usually first suture up the galea and then you take the connective tissue with the skin. So these are important for surgical procedures. Deep to the periosteum or the pericranium we have the cranium or the skull. The skull is composed of flat bones. So the outer table of the skull is a cortical flat bone. And then you have the inner surface made of spongy bone, which is more a roller and has veins going through it called the diploic vein. And then the more deeper inner table is again composed of cortical bone. So you kind of have this, look at the CT scan in the bone window, you kind of have this wafers, chocolate wafers configuration where you have the outer cortical bone, inner spongy bone, and the inner table, inner cortical bone. And this is actually super important. Again, when it comes to doing craniotomies for neurosurgical procedure, you actually have a bar hole drill that actually, it's a automatic pressure sensor drill. You put it in to make a hole in the skull, the drill actually senses the outocortical bone, the inner spongy bone, and when it gets to the inner table, inner cortical bone, right at there, it stops so that you don't, you know, drill through the brain. It automatically pressure senses and stops. Deep to the periosteum, you have three layers of membrane collectively known as the meninges, which wraps around both the brain and the spinal cord, with the cranial meninges specifically referring to the section that covers the brain. From superficial to deep, the layers are dura mater, arachnoid mater, and pia mater. Mater in Latin means mother. So you can see in this picture, the cranial meninges, you have the two layers of the dura, periosteal and meningeal dura. Inside it, you have the arachnoid mater, and then right on top of the brain parenchyma, you have the pia mater. Same thing covering the spinal cord. You have the dura mater, you have the arachnoid mater, and you have the pia mater. Let's talk about these three layers in depth now. So the superficial meningeal layer is the dura mater. Dura meaning hard. And as the name suggests, it is the hardest of the meningeal layers. So there's two layers of the dura mater. You have the periosteal dura that always attaches to the skull from the inside, fully adheres to the skull, and attaches to it at specifically the suture lines. And then the inner layer is the meningeal dura or the dura propria that is closer to the arachnoid matter. And the space between them is like a potential space that usually doesn't open up, but you'll see them more during intra-op neurosurgical procedures. Sometimes you try to separate them. But they do get separated to make the channels that makes up the sinuses. So for example, if you look at the diagram here, you can see the superior sagittal sinus, which is formed by the periosteal dura completely attaching to the cranium, but the meningeal dura separates here and comes down to form that foc cerebri. And that opening between the periosteal dura and the meningeal dura, that is actually your superior sagittal sinus. Deeper to the meningeal dura or dura propria, you have the second layer of meninges called the arachnoid matter, arachnoid meaning spider-like, and the membrane actually looks like spider webs. And when you look at it inside the brain intra-op, it almost looks like this gel -like membrane that moves with the CSF as the CSF is present in the subarachnoid space and it's this vispy thin membrane and deeper to that is your even softer pia mater pia meaning soft and it directly adheres to the brain parenchyma and you can see that you can separate the arachnoid and the pia because the pia actually goes into all the sulci so as you open up the gyri of the of the brain in neuroanatomy you'll see that you have these little troughs that are your sulci, the P actually goes into the troughs and forms that very thin membrane over the brain parenchyma. And forming these different layers, you have three clinical significant spaces or potential spaces where you can have bleeds. So in the next few sites, we'll talk about those spaces and what kind of bleeds happen in there. So the first potential space that can happen within the brain from superficial is your epidural space. So we talked about the two layers of the dura. You have the periosteal dura and meningeal dura. So the epidural space is epi on top or above the dura. So it's the space between the cranium and the periosteal dura. And you can form bleeds over there. And usually it is due to the injury to middle meningeal artery. So these are very big pulsatile arteries that travel in the groove of the skull, above the dura, right on the skull. They are branches of the internal maxillary artery, which comes off of the external carotid artery. So bleeds of the middle meningeal artery from high-speed trauma can cause buildup of blood in that space, in the epidural space, causing epidural hematoma. The next cavity, moving more deeper, is subdural space, sub, below the dura. So this is a space between meningeal dura and arachnoid mater. And these are, you can have bleeds in this space creating subdural hematoma. And these are usually formed by the injury to bridging veins. Bridging veins are tiny veins that travel, traverses the dura to get outside from inside the brain to outside the dura. And the injury to these brains can cause chronic venous bleed, causing subdural hematomas. And finally, the more deeper space that you can have is the subarachnoid space, subarachnoid, below the arachnoid, within that arachnoid space where the CSF flows. And a bleed in this region usually causes what's known as subarachnoid hemorrhage. And these are usually from aneurysm rupture of aneurysms from your arteries that foams the circle of villus that we will talk about in the cerebrovascular anatomy lecture. All of which, all of this we'll cover in deep in the pathology and the cerebrovascular anatomy lecture that I will be giving in next week or so for you guys. so we have these two important dura folds that creates separation of different parts of the brain so I want you guys to take a look focus on this picture over here so you see the left cerebral hemisphere the right cerebral hemisphere and you see the cerebellum so there is this sheet that's that is separating the left and right hemisphere and there's another sheet that's separating the cerebrum from the cerebellum. So the sheet that is separating the two hemispheres of the cerebrum, they are called the fox cerebri. So the fox cerebri is basically the enfolding of your meningeal dura. Remember I said the periosteal dura always attaches to the cranium, whereas the meningeal dura separates from the periosteal dura, comes inside and forms this, runs through the longitudinal fissure or the interhemispheric fissure, fissure means big separation, and creates this dural sheet called the foc cerebri. And then it attaches again, comes back and attaches back to the perioseal dura. And that separation is what creates that superior sagittal sinus that I mentioned before, which we will talk about later in the cerebrovascular anatomy lecture. So that enfolding, that sickle-shaped enfolding of the meningeal dura is the foc cerebrae that separates the two cerebrum. And you can see that clearly here as well. So you see this is the superior sagittal sinus, that's the venous structure, that is created by that meningeal dura coming inside and you see that sheet, that dura sheet running between that interhemispheric longitudinal fissure separating your right cerebrum. from the left cerebrum. And then it also runs down. So you have the periosteal dura again covering here. And the meningial dura separates again laterally, comes in to separate your cerebrum from the cerebellum. So that sheet of meningial dura coming in to separate that, that's called your tentorium cerebelli. Tent, meaning it looks like a tent. Tentorium cerebelli. And again, here, the periosteal dura is fully attaching to the cranium, where the meningeal dura is coming in, and you create another sinus from that opening, that channel, that is your transfer sinus, again, we'll talk about that in later. And you have the foc cerebri coming down, attaching and connecting with the tentorium cerebellae midline, and you have another channel that's created via a structure, that's your straight sinus, which we also will talk about in the future lectures. The foc cerebri anteriorly attaches to your cristo-galli of the ethmoid bone, which we talked about when we mentioned the olfactory nerves, right? The fibers of it runs through that. And posteriorly, the foc cerebri attaches to the tentorium cerebelli. Whereas the tentorium cerebelli attaches to what's called the clinoid process of the spinoid bone. and posteriorly it attaches to the occipital bone. So what are the clinical implications of understanding these dual folds? It's important to understand because you have brain herniations that happen around them. Brain herniation meaning protrusion or extrusion of parts of the brain through some kind of space. So remember the skull is a closed space. It is tiny and closed space and does not accommodate a lot of volume changes. so in case of a bleed so let's say an injury to an artery or a chronic venous bleed injury to a vein or some kind of neoplastic or inflammatory lesions these are space occupying lesions in the brain and these are new new volume changes in the brain which means the skull does not have space to accommodate it which means something has to move around and what is it something that moves around the brain parenchyma itself it will get compressed and it will start protruding through where are the spaces? And the spaces are around the fox cerebri and tentorium cerebellum. So there are three important herniations that you guys must know for the exam and for your board exams. So A is pointing to transtentorial herniation, to transtentorium through the tentorium. So you have the tentorium cerebellum cerebellum and trans around it. So you have what's called the medial portion of the temporal lobe. So here is your temporal lobe, right? This is your temporal lobe. This is the frontal lobe. So the medial portion of the temporal lobe is called the uncus that you guys will learn. And when there is some lesion, some bleed, some neoplasm, some space-occupying lesion in the same side, then it will compress on the brain there, and your uncus will herniate down through the tentorium cerebellum. um the second kind is the transforaminal or tonsillar herniation so foramen uh meaning the foramen magnum the big opening where the spinal cord goes through um a lesion in that area can herniate or protrude the tonsils of the cerebellum down through the foramen magnum causing tonsillar or transforaminal herniation and finally you have the sephalcine or the cingulate herniation this is the most common one, that is the herniation of the cingulate gyrus right here, that gyrus that runs on top of your corpus callosum that will herniate down the fox cerebri. So the most common of the brain herniations that we talked about is the sub-fallicine herniation or the cingulate herniation. But in your clinical rotations, you will often just hear it being referred to as midline shift. The attending will say, oh, there's an epidural hematoma causing mass effect. The midline shift is five millimeter. So the midline shift is basically measured in a CT scan. So you have the CT of the head here looking at the right side of the brain here. So remember on a radiology image, CT, MRI, MRV, the right and left is always shifted. So this is the right side of the brain. and you can see this cartoon showing the same. So there's a right epidural hematoma here that's compressing the right side of the brain and what's happening is the right side is being shifted over and you have a subfalcine herniation which is where your cingulate gyrus herniates down under the foc cerebri and it's basically shifting most of the brain to the other side and you can also see the ventricles being shifted. So you have this midline imaginary line, which is from the sagittal suture to the sagittal suture, you can see that red line. However, your midline here, your foc cerebri and your septum pellucidum, which is this thin line between your lateral ventricles, your thin membrane that separates your lateral ventricles, that's also usually midline, that's also shifted to the left side. So that's the yellow line. So you basically take the measurement between that sagittal suture line, that imaginary line, and that is your midline shift. And you want to record it over time to see if the midline shift is getting bigger and bigger, which means the compression, that mass effect is getting bigger. And if it's getting lesser, that means, okay, the mass effect is resolving, the hematoma is resolving. So this is a huge clinical thing that you will see. And during any kind of herniation, since there's a space occupying, there's a new volume occupying that skull, there's going to be an increase in intracranial pressure. So you'll have symptoms such as headache, nausea, vomiting, photophobia, phonophobia. Those are certain symptoms that happens with increased intracranial pressure. And not only does the brain parenchyma, and in this case, it's the cingulate gyrus that's getting compressed and will have injury to the brain itself, the protruded or the herniated brain can compress on other neurovascular structures. So specifically for cephalcine herniation, the cingulate gyrus, which runs right on top of your corpus callosum, imagine this is your corpus callosum, your cingulate gyrus runs on top of it, and you have this artery, the pericolosal artery, pericolosal meaning peri near the callosum, corpus callosum, which is a branch of anterior cerebral artery. So often during cephalcine herniation, the herniation of the cingulate gyrus, you can have the pericolosal artery getting compressed and you'll have symptoms relating to that which usually is contralateral leg weakness. So not only is the brain parenchyma itself getting compressed, it can go and compress on other important neurovascular structures and cause ischemia or compression of important nerves. The second of the brain herniations is the transtentorial herniation or the uncle herniation. Again, uncus is the medial portion of the temporal lobe that can herniate through the tentorium cerebellum down. You can either have downward transventory herniation, there's also upward transventory herniation, but that's usually cerebellar tonsils that herniate upward. One important thing to keep in mind is that the uncus can herniate down on the ipsilateral side of the hematoma or neoplasm or any kind of space-occupying lesion. So in this example, you have the CT head. What you're seeing is on the right side, you have a chronic subjural hematoma that's compressing this whole temporal lobe, and mainly the medial temporal lobe, the uncas, is herniating into that space through the tentorium cerebellum. And you can see you have the oculomotor nerve that's going through in that region that compresses the oculomotor nerve. So a big clinical thing that you look out for that is a neurosurgical emergency is the blown pupil that happens. So anytime somebody has any kind of space occupying lesion, usually a subdural hematoma or epidural hematoma that causes transtentorial herniation, the uncle herniation that compresses the oculomotor nerve, you'll see the ipsilateral pupils of that person being blown, meaning it's highly dilated. Remember, your oculomotor nerve contains the parasympathetic fibers that cause constriction of the pupils. So if there is a compression of that oculomotor nerve, then there is no constriction with the light. So the pupil will remain dilated when you flash lights. So you can look at this patient. You can see the right eye is completely fine. It's fully dilated. So when you flash a light, it should constrict, but it remains fixed, meaning it is not constricting to light and it remains dilated. And usually we say greater than five millimeters. So you usually use a pen light and it has numbers that you can measure the pupil diameter. So greater than five millimeter is considered a blown pupil. And that is a neurosurgical emergency because even before you even take the CT scan, you know that this patient's had a traumatic brain injury and has a bleed that is causing an ankle herniation that's compressing the oculomotor nerve. So there's intracranial pressure that's being built up and this patient needs to be taken to the OR emergently. And we usually do a craniectomy, basically take off the skull in that region, let the brain, so you're basically opening up that closed skull space so that the brain can accommodate for the edema that's about to ensue. And finally, we have the transforuminal herniation. This is when you have the tonsils of the cerebellum. And sometimes it can be the medulla and the brainstem itself that herniate down through the foramen magnum. So here we have a T1 MRI. I know this is a T1-weighted MRI because in T1, your fluid, your CSF is black. In a T2 MRI, your CSF is white. So in a T1 MRI, You can see the tonsils that are herniating down through this big cavity, the foramen magnum. And this can be, again, due to some kind of space -occupying lesion, mostly in the posterior fosa below the tentorium that's compressing down. And this is usually a poor prognosis in patients because anytime you have a brainstem injury, you have the centers of breathing and consciousness and alertness, those are reduced and the patient is often uptunded, which is a reduced level of awareness or consciousness. We'll quickly talk about two meningeal pathologies or meningeal lesions and infections. Again, I'll cover this in more detail in the cerebrovascular pathology lecture later. So we have the meningioma, the most common primary brain tumor, and this is a benign well -circumscribed slow -growing tumor. So the classic board question, level one, step one, is that the patient has a chronic headache. They come in, do a MRI. The MRI shows a small circumscribed homogenous supratentorial mass. Don't even think about it. It's menageoma. So menageomas, 90% of them are supratentorial above the tentorium cerebelly that happens. And in an MRI with contrast, so again, this is a T1 rated MRI because the ventricles where the CSF is black, if this was white, then it's T2. So in this T1 rated MRI, you see this homogenous, there's no heterogeneity. It's all smooth and same, and it's well circumscribed. And the main thing that you look for to distinguish the meningioma is what's called the dural tail. So because these are lesions of the meninges, the arachnoid and the dura, you will see it light up a little bit, kind of exactly what it says. It's a tail that you see because the dura lights up. And that's a classic presentation of the meningioma. Meningitis is the inflammation of the pia and arachnoid layer. So the pia and arachnoid together are called the leptomeninges. So it's in an MRI or in a CT here that you have, you'll see leptomeningeal enhancement. And that's because of the inflammation causing the edema. So you'll have enhancement that way. And this is often caused by gram-negative bacteria, but it can also be viral or fungal. And remember, the meninges, the dura arachnoid, and the pia also extends down to the spinal cord, so you can have the meningitis extends from the spinal cord itself. And the patient's present with fever, headache, nuchal rigidity, that's the neck rigidity, and you guys will learn about the Brudinsky and the Koenig sign. That's when you ask the patient to flex their neck because the the meninges goes all the way down to the spinal cord, it's irritated and the patient will kind of come into the fetal position because there's pain that's elicited from the inflammation of the meninges. And often you do a lumbar puncture because now that the blood -brain barrier has been compromised in meningitis, you will see the CSF has bacteria and cell culture. It will normalize to the plasma cell components. So take a couple of minutes and read through this question. This kind of recaps the brain herniations that we went through. So this patient clearly requires neurosurgical intervention immediately. So the CT scan is showing a clear right subdural hematoma, a chronic subdural hematoma that's causing uncle herniation, right? The transcentral herniation down the tentorium cerebellum. And because the stem says that he has a dilated, unresponsible right pupil of six millimeter, right? He has a blown pupil, compression of the oculomotor nerve, right? And that is a neurosurgical emergency, as we said before. So he's having a uncle herniation and it needs an initial urgent neurosurgical intervention where you'll do a craniectomy and relieve that pressure. So this is like a second degree question that you can expect on your comp as well as your level one and step one. So we'll shift gears now and talk about the ventricular system. So the ventricular system was first ever defined by the great Leonardo da Vinci, who's known to be an artist, but he also was a great anatomist and drew diagrams of skeletal system, muscular system, and as well as the brain. So in the early 1500s, we have records of him, his ventriculography, where he went into, reported to have went into a butcher shop and injected hot vax into a dead ox's skull. And after the vax set, he took it out. so he was able to create that ventriculography. The VACs filled up the reservoirs inside the ventricles and he was able to draw it. So that's the first ever documented drawing of a ventricular system. It would have been great if you guys got the lecture on ventricular system from Da Vinci, but not to worry because you will be getting it from Da Vinci. i know that was bad but um bear with me guys we have about 10 more slides to go so let's talk about the ventricular system so the ventricular system is a connected network of cavities in the brain so it contains uh and flow has flowing css through it all the time so you have the css in the subarachnoid space that is cushioning and nourishing the brain but then you have separately you have the css most of it collected in the ventricular system. And the ventricles are aligned by ependymal cells, which are glial cells. Remember the special epithelial cells of the choroid plexus that forms that blood CSF barrier so that the CSF in the ventricles are not in contact with the blood vessels. So you have two lateral ventricles, one in each of the cerebrum, right you have two lateral ventricles they're interconnected to the third ventricle which is midline in the diencephalon in the thalamus the two thalamus comes together in the midline is your third ventricle and then you have the fourth ventricle in the hind brain and from the fourth ventricle you have these lateral rhesus that connects the ventricles to the subarachnoid space that way we'll talk about each of these individually and their anatomy in the next few slides the first and the largest part of the ventricular system is your lateral ventricles which is present in either each of the cerebral hemispheres so you have the lateral ventricle here so this is a CT head axial cut and the lateral ventricles have three horns and a body so here you can see the anterior horn or the frontal horn as seen here and then you have the body of the lateral ventricles which is the biggest portion. And then you have the occipital horn or the posterior horn, and you have the temporal horn or the inferior horn. The temporal horn is present in the temporal lobe, and you really don't usually see that in a CT scan. And if you do see that, that's usually in the setting of ventriculomegaly in the setting of hydrocephalus, which we will talk about in the future. And these lateral ventricles, they're separate from each other, and they're separated through this thin sheet of membrane called the septum pellucidum. I mentioned septum pellucidum when talking about sepfalcine or cingulate herniation. Remember, it's also referred to as the midline shift, and the midline shift can be measured from how the septum pellucidum gets compressed and the ventricle system gets compressed to the other side, the contralateral side of the bleed, and that's how you measure it. This is another picture showing the lateral ventricle here, this opening, this is a mid -sagittal cadaveric picture. You can appreciate these white matter tracts that form the anterior and superior roof of the lateral ventricle. That is your big corpus callosum, the white matter tract that communicates your left and right cerebral hemispheres. And inferiorly, you have the white matter tract of the fornix that forms the inferior wall. And the lateral ventricle connects to the third ventricle through this opening here called the foramen of Monroe or the interventricular foramen. So you have two foramen of Monroe that connects the two lateral ventricles into the third ventricle. Connecting from the lateral ventricles is your second part of the ventricular system which is the third ventricle. So again this is the mid -sagital cut in the cadaveric picture. You guys will get familiar with this image very, very quickly. This is all of the stuff that you see here you will need to memorize and understand at one point. So again, you have the lateral ventricles connecting into the third ventricle through that interventricular foramen or the foramen of Monroe. And the third ventricle is between. So you have your two thalami on the left and the right and they come together and that cavity formed, that mid-median slit-like cavity formed by the thalamus and your hypothalamus, which is right here, part of the hypothalamus, that is your third ventricle, and there's one third ventricle. You actually have this connection between the thalamus that goes through the median connection called the ***** intermedia or the interthalamic adhesion that kind of goes through the third ventricle. The third ventricle then connects to the fourth ventricle through this very narrow conduit called the aqueduct of sylvius or the sylvian aqueduct. You can see how small it is compared to the rest of the third ventricle. And this is a, because of the narrowness of it, often you can have obstructive hydrocephalus from a clot or bleed or some kind of mass obstructing the flow of the third ventricle from the flow of the CSF from third ventricle and the fourth ventricle. So then the CSF gets built up in the third ventricle and the lateral ventricle, and you can have ventricular megaly. And other structures to appreciate here, you have the optic chiasm that kind of forms the anterior border. You have the lamina terminalis here, which is the actual anterior wall of the third ventricle. Remember, we talked about the organum vasculosum of the lamina terminalis, one of the circumventricular organs, which is right here. You have, here is your infundibulum and the pituitary, remember the posterior pituitary or the neurohypophysis, which is another circumventricular organ. You can also have the median eminence, which is here, another circumventricular organs. Just kind of doing a little review of what we learned. And you also have the pineal gland posterior to it, which is another circumventricular organ. The CSF from the third ventricle then flows through the aqueduct of sylvius into the fourth ventricle, which is between your cerebellum and your brainstem. So that's your final big portion of the ventricular system. The CSF then can also flow through the central canal of medulla into the spinal cord. Remember, the brain and spinal cord is in continuation with each other. From here, from the fourth ventricle, you actually have three openings that connects the subarachnoid space, that connects the ventricles into the subarachnoid space. So you have from the fourth ventricle, you have a median opening called the foramen of Magendi, and you have two lateral opening called the foramen of Lushka, which allows the CSF to flow from the ventricular system into the subarachnoid space. So this is where that blood CSF barrier is not present because it's an actual opening from the ventricles into the subarachnoid space. The CSF then flows around the brain through the subarachnoid space and then they will connect into the sinuses through arachnoid granulation or villi which we will talk about. The cerebrospinal fluid surrounds the brain and mainly surrounds the brain and the spinal cord as it is in continuum and mainly acts as a shock absorber. So you have the cranium the very strong skull that mainly acts as a protection for the brain, but then the brain is suspended in this fluid that is able to absorb a lot of the shock and prevent harmful traumatic injury to the brain. But there has been also, the CSF has been theorized to have immunological function similar to the lymphatic system of the brain, which is called the glymphatic system. This is more of a new system that has been found in the last couple of years. There's a lot of research that's being done on it. I'm not too familiar with it. That's why I'm not going to go too deep into it. But the CSF has been theorized to have similar functions as the glymphatic system. But what it is, is it is an ultrafiltrate of the plasma, of the blood plasma. So we know that the blood plasma has this much ratio of RBCs by blood cells, proteins. So similar to that, the CSF is an ultrafiltrate of it. So it has very, very little, one or two that you can count, red blood cells, white blood cells, and proteins. And the CSF is produced by the choroid plexus cells that line the ventricles, specifically the lateral ventricles, and you'll see mostly in the third ventricle and the fourth ventricle. So a person, on average, produces 500 ml per day of CSF, And they circulate within the lateral ventricles, starting from the lateral ventricles, connecting to the third ventricle via the foramen of Monroe, and into the fourth ventricle through the aqueduct of Silvius. And then from the fourth ventricle, it has free connection to the spinal cord from the medullary canal. And from the lateral, from the ventricles, it connects to the subarachnoid space via the three recesses that we talked about. So laterally, you have the two foramen of Lushka, and medially, you have the foramen of Munro that connects the ventricles, CSF from the ventricles into the subarachnoid space. From the subarachnoid space, it flows through and into the superior sagittal sinus via the arachnoid villi, which we will talk about in the next slide. So once the CSF travels from the ventricles into the subarachnoid space through the foramen of Magendi and Lushka, it travels through the subarachnoid space and nourishes and suspends the brain and the fluid, and then it gets reabsorbed, right? It cannot stay in that same system. It's continuously circulating, and it gets reabsorbed into the body's circulatory system via this outpouching of the arachnoid membrane. So you have your arachnoid here, and the arachnoid membrane outpouches into the superior sagittal sinus mainly. And this is called arachnoid granulations or the arachnoid villi. That's where the CSF gets dumped into the sinuses. And from the sinuses, it will travel into the venous system and back into the heart where it gets then pumped into the lungs and gets reoxygenated and then the arachnoid, the choroid plexus keeps making more CSF from the ultrafiltrated plasma. So here's another schema of showing how the CSF flows from this arachnoid space through the arachnoid villi into the venous sinuses. I want to quickly touch up on certain pathologies of the ventricular system all of these will be in detail covered in the cerebrovascular pathology lecture later so what we have what's called the choroid plexus tumors these are rare benign tumors of the choroid plexus cells that line the ventricles and these tumors cause overproduction of the CSF and so you can imagine you have buildup of overproduction, overproduced CSF, which then makes the ventricles look bigger. And that's what's called ventriculomegaly. So this is a T1 -weighted MRI. And I know this is T1 because the fluid, the CSF, is black. If the CSF in the ventricles were white, that would be a T2-weighted MRI. And you can look at this and see, this is huge ventricles. And on the right, you can see the third ventricle here and the fourth ventricles are so big, and the occipital hones are so big. So there's just tentraventriculomegaly. Another pathology is the intraventricular hemorrhage, which is hemorrhage within the ventricle. It can either be primary where the hemorrhage starts within the ventricles. That's usually seen in preterm babies where they have the germinal centers within the ventricles that hemorrhage. We'll talk about it in later lectures. Or it could be a secondary intraventricular hemorrhage, which is usually an extension from an intracerebral hemorrhage. And finally, you have ventriculitis. This is the inflammation of the ependymal cells. Those are the special endothelial cells of the choroid plexus that line the ventricles. And you can see the white enhancement, which is from the edema from the inflammation, and this can be from an infection or a post -traumatic or implant -related meningitis. The final pathology of the ventricular system that we'll talk about is hydrocephalus, which is basically an abnormal accumulation of the CSF within the ventricles of the brain, and there are two primary mechanisms by which this can happen. One is because there is a problem with the absorption of CSF from the ventricular system. And the other one is there's an actual overproduction of CSF. So either problem with absorbing it or a problem with too much CSF overproduction. And we already talked about the overproduction, which only makes up very smaller cases of the hydrocephalus. And it can be from the choroid plexus papilloma, which we talked about in the last slide. So mostly hydrocephalus is caused by subnormal CSF reabsorption. And this can happen by two mechanisms. There's the obstructive hydrocephalus, which is actually, there's a mechanical obstruction of the flow of CSF through the ventricular system that we talked about. And the other one is there's an actual problem that's blocking the reabsorption of CSF from the subarachnoid space into the venous system. So with the obstructive hydrocephalus, you usually observe it, obstruction of the sylvian duct. We talked about how the sylvian duct is the narrowest portion in the ventricular system. So if there is any clot or any mass or anything, any tumor, intraventricular hemorrhage, anything like that, that blocks the flow, then you have proximal to the blockage, you'll have ventriculomegaly and hydrocephalus and distilled to the blockage of wherever it is in the ventricular system, you'll have actually smaller ventricles. So here on the MRI, this is a T1 -weighted MRI. Again, I know this is T1 -weighted because the CSF in the ventricles are black. If it was white, then it would be a T2-weighted MRI. I know I keep talking about this. This is just so that you guys get used to it. So you actually have a colloid cyst that's blocking the intraventricular foramen, which connects your lateral ventricle into the third ventricle, and what you end up having is the ventriculomegaly of the lateral ventricles. So this is an obstructive hydrocephalus, aka non-communicating hydrocephalus. In a communicating hydrocephalus or non-obstructive hydrocephalus, the problem usually lies within the arachnoid villi or the arachnoid granulation. So there's something obstructing it or that has destroyed the arachnoid granulation so that the CSF cannot be reabsorbed from the subarachnoid space into the venous system. And this usually happens with meningitis trauma or subarachnoid hemorrhage. So in this picture, again, a T1-rated MRI, this is a patient who had subarachnoid hemorrhage and then later on started developing hydrocephalus, which is a common complication of subarachnoid hemorrhage. And you can see dilation of the lateral ventricles. And I want you guys to pay attention. You're seeing the temporal horns of the lateral ventricle. I mentioned that usually you don't see the temporal horns. And if you do, that is a sign of hydrocephalus and ventriculomegaly. And you can also see dilation of the third ventricle. And this is probably due to the blood in this subarachnoid space that probably either obstructed the arachnoid granulation or completely destroyed it. And finally, I just want to mention some other miscellaneous pathologies that result in hydrocephalus, none of which actually kind of goes with the two mechanisms of hydrocephalus that I mentioned in the last slide. So we have what's called the hydrocephalus X vacuole. So in this picture on the right, again, T1 rated MRI, you see that ventriculomegaly. But this is not actually due to there's an overproduction of CSF or problem with the reabsorption. This is actually because there is the atrophy of the brain that then makes the ventricles bigger. So it looks like there's ventriculomegaly and you often see that with Alzheimer's patients. There's the cortical atrophy. And another pathology is called normal pressure hydrocephalus or NPH, a heavily tested topic on the boards. This is the actual mechanism of hydrocephalus, not fully understood, but usually when you have hydrocephalus, you have buildup of CSF, which then causes high intracranial pressure and patients usually have symptoms of high ICP. But with NPH, the pressure is normal, and this is often seen in older adults and comes with a triad of urinary incontinence, cognitive dysfunction, and gait abnormality, often known as wet, walkie, and wobbly. And finally, you have a pathology called pseudotumor cerebris, which is seen in young females. It's also known as idiopathic intracranial hypertension. Again, the actual mechanism is not fully understood, but this is, again, a hydrocephalus that results in high intracranial pressure without an identifiable mass or obstruction in the brain. And the patients usually complain of classic headache, transient visual loss, pulsatile tinnitus, and dizziness. And the management usually depends on draining the CSF using a lumbar drain. So you're trying to relieve that intracranial pressure by taking out some of the CSF. So that was the end of the lecture. Here is your summary slide. I want you guys to look through each of these pictures and ask yourself, are you able to fully describe what this picture is and what this pathology is? If you are, then you are good for my lecture. For those who stuck out until the end, thank you so much. You guys are troopers. I know this was a long and heavy lecture, but make sure you go through the slides over and over again. And if you guys have any questions and want to Zoom or have emails to send, please email me at my email is right here. and also if you're someone interested in neurosurgery and wants to get involved in research and actually do participate in surgery so this is me actually evacuating a subdural hematoma email me we have a lot of opportunities I work at St. Barnabas Hospital and also please take time to fill out the lecture feedback form so that I know how to improve my future lectures. Good luck, guys.