Hi, everyone. I am Dr. Adina Leder, and today I am discussing from myelopathy to myopathy. The session objectives of this lecture today is to explain how to localize based on clinical presentation, describe how to exclude treatable causes of potentially fatal disorders, correlate the differential diagnosis of disease at each level of the motor unit, and we're going to apply treatment options if there are any available. Then we also will be able to identify a neurological emergency. So overview includes, we're going to start in the spinal cord and look at spinal cord disorders. These are called myelopathies. We'll go through the anterior horn cell disorders, motor neuron disorders, ventral root disorders, also known as radiculopathies, dorsal root ganglion disorders, plexopathies, peripheral neuropathies, demyelinating disorders, and axonal changes, neuromuscular junction disorders, and then down into the myopathies. so this is a picture of the motor unit and the arrow here is pointing to the spinal cord which is what we're going to be starting with so the first case is a 15 year old boy who presents with anxiety migraines and adhd who has rapidly progressive lower extremity weakness a month prior to the weakness he developed fever and flu-like symptoms with myalgia in both legs the leg weakness persists despite resolution of flu-like symptoms. On an MRI, there is linear hyperintensity in the gray matter in the thoracic region, and you can see where the arrow is pointing that there is some light spots within the spinal cord. The CSF showed predominant lymphocytes. this is what's called acute flaccid myelitis and basically it is flaccid limb weakness after viral infection the reflexes are reduced and it is often associated with different pathogens specifically enteroviruses D68 and D71. It could also be seen with poliovirus and flaviviruses. This often occurs most commonly after a respiratory or a GI virus. It's more common in children, and an outbreak like this may occur every other year. so when you're confronting a spinal cord lesion the way that i like to remember all the different parts of the differential is by using the mnemonic vitamins so the first is v for vascular i infectious or post -infectious traumatic autoimmune toxic metabolic inflammatory neoplastic, or structural. And to the right, the image shows if there was a lesion at each of these levels, what type of weakness you would see and at what level this would occur. So these are some of the things that could be seen within the differential. So for a vascular event in the spinal cord, you would consider something like a spinal cord infarct or a vascular malformation. In terms of an infection to the spinal cord, you would consider virus, bacteria, ******, or post-viral. In terms of traumatic, there could be decompression illness or trauma for autoimmune, lupus, Sjogren's, demyelinating diseases such as MS, neuromyelitis optica, and MOG is a newer identified demyelinating condition that's more often seen in children. In terms of metabolic issues, you could see B12 deficiency, drug exposures, nitrous oxide toxicity, inflammatory neurosarcoidosis has to be considered in terms of neoplastic spinal cord tumors, whether they're primary or metastatic, and structural, a syrinx or a fluid -filled cavity within the spinal cord could also be considered. In terms of the symptoms of a myelopathy, or what's a spinal cord lesion, it depends on the tracks and the disease process. So patients will often present with gait instability or imbalance, stiffness or clumsiness, weakness in the arms and or legs, depending on the level of the spinal cord lesion. There can be often urinary urgency and or bowel incontinence. There's also something called the sensory level. And at that level, it could appear to be the patient complains of either an irritating band sensation at the superior margin. There could be numbness or tingling below the level. Sometimes they describe what feels like a belt that's squeezing them. There can also be episodic muscle spasms that will cause unintentional extension of legs or cramping in the calves. And some of the signs of a myelopathy could be flaccid paralysis, which is the signs of a corticospinal tract disruption, and it can evolve to weakness with increased tone and brisk reflexes. A Babinski sign can be seen, which is an extensor plantar response. When you ****** the lateral part of the sole of the foot, the toe is up. And on the side, there are some videos that you can look at at your convenience. There's also a Hoffman sign, which is an upper extremity equivalent of a lower extremity reflex. So similar to Babinski sign, but it's in the upper extremity, and that can reflect a cervical cord lesion. So the upper motor neurons originate in the primary motor cortex of the brain. The axons comprise the corticobulbar tract and the corticospinal tract. The corticobulbar tract goes to the brainstem. The corticospinal tract connects to the spinal cord. The lower motor neurons are also known as alpha motor neurons or anterior horn cells, and they are located in the motor nuclei in the brainstem or the anterior gray matter of the spinal cord. The axons connect to muscles of the bulbar region or the limbs. And so you can see the arrow pointing to the anterior horn of the spinal cord. And that is what we're going to discuss next. So this is case two. The year is 1999, and a 73-year-old man from Queens was presented to the hospital with fever, headache, rash, and body aches. His symptoms progressed to flaccid paralysis. There were absent reflexes. He had difficulty speaking, and he was unable to swallow, which is dysarthria and dysphagia. He then had significant difficulty with breathing, developed respiratory failure, and needed to be ventilated. He was brought to Long Island Jewish Hospital and was in the intensive care unit. He was found to have West Nile virus, and this is one of the first cases that was found in 1999. 9. Neuroinvasive disease is uncommon and occurs in less than 1% of people, but of 5-10% of neuroinvasive cases can be associated with myelitis. Specifically, it appears like a polio-like illness with acute flaccid paralysis, decreased reflexes, and bowel and bladder dysfunction. This is a flavivirus. It often can start with fever, rash, myalgia, but more commonly they could see meningitis or encephalitis. The anterior horn syndrome refers to lower motor neuron degeneration and weakness is seen. There is preservation of all sensory modalities. Some of the examples of anterior horn syndromes include spinal muscular atrophy, spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy, such as Kennedy disease, West Nile myelitis, and polio myelitis. So spinal muscular atrophy is a group of inherited disorders where there is degeneration of anterior horn cells. The most common type is caused by a variation in what's called SMN, or Survival Motor Neuron 1. We are now up to nine recognized types, which have been identified, and all involve a varying degree of weakness. The clinical presentation varies from early death and infancy, which is type 0 and 1A, up to type 4, which the patient can walk independently as an adult. Poliomyelitis is a highly infectious enterovirus. 1% of infected patients will develop acute paralytic syndrome due to infection of the anterior horn cells. There are painful muscle spasms that occur before flaccid weakness, and it could be either spinal and or bulbar. Vaccination remains the main means of polio prevention. And therefore, there's the risk that this can occur if patients are not getting vaccinated. The iron lung was seen in the 1940s and 50s, and a vaccine was not developed until 1955. However, patients who were extremely sick were placed in this iron lung, and the picture is seen there to keep them alive. Case 3 is a 67-year -old man who presented with an eight-month history of slurred speech. Over that same time period, he had weakness of the left hand without numbness. Cramping was noted in his hands and legs, and he admitted to crying spontaneously. this is ALS or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis the motor symptoms include weakness of limbs with atrophy or wasting of the muscles there are bulbar symptoms that could include speaking difficulty with speaking chewing and swallowing and reflexes are brisk there's pseudobulbar affect so laughing or crying, which isn't necessarily under voluntary control. Cognitive features include a small proportion that also have frontotemporal dementia. And so ALS is a combination of upper and lower motor neuron symptoms. Some examples of the lower motor neuron symptoms include weakness, fasciculations, which is like a rippling of the muscles without actual contraction, and there's atrophy or wasting of the muscles. The upper motor neuron findings include spasticity, hyperreflexia, and pathologic reflexes such as a Babinski. A retained reflex in a limb that is weak is considered abnormal, and that could be a clinical clue. So if a patient has a weak leg and yet they still have a brisk reflex, then it has to be considered that there's something that needs to be further investigated. In terms of the pelvic floor, urinary and ****** sphincters are unaffected. And so this slide has been added to as there are more famous people that have developed ALS. You can see Lou Gehrig all the way on the left, Stephen Hawkins is to the right of Lou Gehrig. Eric Dean is to the right of Stephen Hawkins, and then Steve Gleason is a famous football player who was diagnosed with ALS as well. And many of these people have gone public to raise awareness of this condition. Next area is what's called the dorsal root ganglion, and the blue arrow is showing exactly where this area is. So case four is a 78 -year-old man with other comorbidities who presents with several days of severe pain on the right side of his thorax. On examination, there is a vesicular rash present along the T6 distribution. And here you can see some different images of ****** zoster, which is localized to the dorsal root ganglion. So varicella zoster virus, these are ****** viruses, HSV1, 2, and VZV. They reside in the dorsal root and trigeminal ganglia. VZV causes two conditions, the primary infection, varicella, which is chickenpox, and then the reactivation infection, which is ******, zoster, or shingles. Zoster is a common complication of a prior varicella infection, and vesicular lesions occur along a dermatome, which you saw in the previous slide. The possible etiologies of a DRG or a dorsal root ganglion lesion. It's also known as a sensory neuronopathy. Include infectious causes such as HIV, HTLV, EBV, Zika, and VZV. These are all infections. Perineoplastic, small cell lung cancer, breast, ovarian, autoimmune. includes Sjogren's, lupus, or rheumatoid arthritis, and drugs include cisplatin, which is a chemotherapeutic agent, and from a hereditary standpoint, Fabrese, although less common, can also cause a sensory neuronopathy. And so features of a dorsal root ganglion lesion include a non-length dependent asymmetric sensory deficit with preserved motor strength. The proximal areas can be affected prior to distal areas, which include upper extremities, face, and trunk. It's common to have pain. There could be profound sensory loss with gait and limitaxia and absent reflexes. And moving down to the ventral root, you can see where the arrow is. So case 5 is a 45 -year-old man who presents to the emergency room with severe pain in the left lumbar region. Onset was one week ago when he sneezed. He experienced radiation of pain down the left leg. There has been progressive worsening over the past week. On examination, a foot drop was present. There was about three out of five dorsiflexion weakness on the left leg. The ankle reflex is diminished on the left and there was sensory loss on the lateral aspect of the left leg. In terms of the differential, it is most common to have a herniated intervertebral disc and spondylosis. There could be a synovial cyst, an infection such as a myelitis or discitis, vertebral fracture, a bony malignant lesion, or an epidural hematoma. And the symptoms of radiculopathy can include radiating pain, reduced reflex along a spinal route. There could be sensory loss and muscle weakness that's applied by the corresponding nerves. And here is an image. You can see on top is the normal disc and below then there's the bulging disc and at the bottom is the herniated disc where the material is thrust out. Next we're going into the plexus and here's an image of the plexus. So case 6 is a 25-year -old man who presents with severe attacks of pain in the left upper arm followed by patchy muscle weakness. On examination, there's weakness, patchy sensory loss, and atrophy in the upper arm. This is actually neuralgic amyotrophy, and it can also be known as Parsonage-Turner syndrome, which is a type of plexopathy. It typically presents with acute onset of shoulder pain that's localized to one side, the pain resolves, but then a sensory loss and weakness occurs in the affective limb. The risk factors include recent viral illness or surgery, and this is inflammatory in nature. And over time, it can improve. And just a quick reminder of what the brachial plexus looks like. The possible causes of a plexopathy could be trauma, including a traumatic birth injury or motor vehicle accident. There could be neoplasm, primary or metastatic disease, radiation for an underlying cancer which can occur, the symptoms may occur months to years later. It could be due to compression or entrapment. There can be infection to the area including ****** zoster. Inflammatory immune or autoimmune can cause this or there could be hereditary or idiopathic causes. Now we're going down to the peripheral nerve, and case seven is a 56-year-old man with poorly controlled diabetes, hypertension, and elevated cholesterol. He states that his feet feel numb, and he was dropping things lately. On exam, there is reduced sensation in a stocking glove distribution in hands and feet. And this is the typical distal symmetric polyneuropathy in a stocking glove pattern. In the darker areas are where it is most affected, and there's more numbness in the darker areas, and as you go up, he could feel a little bit more. so distal symmetric polyneuropathy is most commonly caused by diabetes or prediabetes it can be due to infectious neuropathies chemotherapy can cause this chronic alcohol use and other toxins there could be b12 deficiency hereditary causes include hereditary motor sensory neuropathy, and then entrapments such as carpal tunnel syndrome or other mononeuropathies. So leprosy is a common cause of chronic, severe, and mutilating infectious neuropathy that occurs in tropical and subtropical parts of the world. This condition is endemic in Africa, Eastern Pacific, and Western Mediterranean. It's due to mycobacteria, leprae, or lepromatosis, and interestingly some armadillos are naturally affected with leprosy. Molokai in Hawaii is a former ***** colony. We are now at a point where diabetes has caused more peripheral neuropathy than leprosy. So working our way down to the myelin sheath. Case 8 is a 25-year -old woman who presents with back pain and numbness in her feet. Over the past day, numbness has been spreading up to her knees. She had a gastroenteritis a few weeks ago. On examination, reflexes are absent, and on the lumbar puncture, she was found to have albuminocytologic dissociation, which means that there is an elevated protein but a normal cell count. and this is consistent with what's called Guillain-Barré syndrome and this encompasses a group of related disorders. AIDP which is acute inflammatory demyelinating polyradicular neuropathy is the most common form. This can occur post -infectious and can be paralytic. The common infections include CMV, mycoplasma, EBV, influenza, and flu. In terms of bacteria, Campylobacter is the most frequently caused after a bad GI bout, and it can be also found after Zika virus and COVID-19 infections. ICU care is often necessary because of dysautonomia. They could develop arrhythmias, bulbar dysfunction, severe and rapidly worsening weakness, evolving respiratory distress, which can be seen in their inability to count to 15 or more during a single breath, and there can be a rapid decline in respiratory function that needs to be watched, this can occur in over 30% within 24 hours. So when a patient like this comes into the emergency room, they're often watched closely and very often put into the ICU because they can become very sick very, very quickly, even if they're looking fine when they initially present. And the treatment of Guillain-Barre includes supportive care, which is the corner sort of treatment. They are also treated with IVIG. Plasma exchange are equally efficacious. Either one should be started as soon as the diagnosis is confirmed. In this condition, steroids have not been found to be effective. CIDP is chronic inflammatory demyelinating, polyradiculoneuropathy. There is symmetric proximal and distal weakness and sensory loss that develops over approximately two months in a progressive stepwise relapsing course. They're reduced or absent reflexes, and usually there is no antecedent illness. There is less common dysautonomia and respiratory failure, which is in contrast to the acute or AIDP, and there can be a postural tremor present. the treatment for CIDP could be one of the following, either IVIG, corticosteroids, or plasma exchange, and 50 to 70 percent of patients will respond to at least one of these therapies. The neuromuscular junction, as you can see pictured here, is the next area, and this is a 23-year -old healthy woman who presents with several weeks of intermittent diplopia, difficulty with climbing stairs, and it becomes worse at the end of the day. On exam, there's difficulty sustaining upgaze, mild lid ptosis, and bilateral hip flexor weakness. The differential diagnosis of neuromuscular junction disorders include myasthenia gravis, Lambert-Eaton myasthenia syndrome, botulism, or immune checkpoint inhibitor -related myasthenia gravis, which is a newer condition seen with these new medications, the immune checkpoint inhibitor. And this is an image of ptosis or drooping of the islet, and that's seen on the patient's right eye, you can see the drooping, which can be seen with myasthenia gravis, especially at the end of the day, or if someone's getting tired. So autoimmune myasthenia gravis causes fatigable ocular limb and bulbar weakness to different degrees. It's more common in younger women and older men, and the antibodies are seen against acetylcholine receptor antibodies or musk antibodies in the majority of patients. Musk antibody positive patients can more often present with difficulty swallowing or chewing. It's a highly treatable condition with immunomodulation, and often a thymectomy may be warranted. Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome is more rare. It's an autoimmune disease that affects the presynaptic neuromuscular transmission. There are antibodies against voltage-gated calcium channels. Half of the patients that have this also have an underlying small cell lung cancer. There is proximal muscle weakness, hyporeflexia, and or areflexia with dysautonomia. Weakness and reflexes will briefly improve after exercise. The treatment for this is 3,4-diaminopyridine, and they need to be seen by oncology for an underlying cancer if that's the cause. botulism is a paralytic illness that's caused by botulinum neurotoxins and it's produced by a strain of clostridium botulinum it inhibits acetylcholine release at the neuromuscular junction this causes an acute descending flaccid paralysis so it starts from the top and works its way down. A patient can be affected by either ingesting the toxin foodborne. There could be wound colonization, either intestinal colonization that can be seen in an adult or an infant, or with cosmetic or aerosolized, obviously not intentionally. The symptoms that occur may include blurred vision, slurred speech, descending, paralysis, and respiratory failure. And getting into the muscle, these are the myopathies. A 70-year-old man presents with a tear history of progressive lower limb weakness. He describes that his knees will give out. There is weakness of deep finger flexors and left quadriceps in an asymmetric pattern. So, inclusion body myositis is the most common myopathy or muscle disease in adults. It affects males twice as often as females. There is knee extensor weakness that's most prominent with loss of ambulation over 10 years, and over time, there's loss of swallowing and respiratory involvement as a cause of death. The symptoms that can be seen in a myopathy include exercise intolerance, muscle atrophy, weakness, muscle cramps, muscle contractures, muscle hypertrophy depending on the type the patient has, myoglobinuria, there's pain in muscles at rest or with exertion depending on the type. And the differential includes different inherited myopathies including dystrophinopathies, inflammatory myopathies such as inclusion body or polymyositis and acquired myopathies which can be induced by medications like statins immune checkpoint inhibitors and also thyroid ophthalmopathy is acquired as well and on and to the right is an image of a patient with a young person, most likely with an inherited myopathy, causing this calf hypertrophy. There are multiple muscular dystrophies. To the right is an image, as there used to be different fundraising events. There is myotonic dystrophy, Duchenne muscular dystrophy, Becker muscular dystrophy, fascio-scapular, humeral, and Emory -Dreyfus muscular dystrophy, and limb girdle muscular dystrophy. And so in summary, hopefully you will have some idea about how to localize lesions based on clinical presentation, generate a differential based on the localization, and try to not miss a treatable diagnosis knowing what the appropriate treatment is. Thank you very much for your attention.