Hello everyone, this is a neuropathology lecture on demyelinating diseases. And these are the session objectives, which should be the same as in your CPG. These are the selected topics that you'll be tested on. I have other topics in here, but those are for board studying and other things, but these are the main ones here listed here. Okay, so just going over the basics of demyelination. we're meaning loss of myelin basically and in the great amount of cases the axons are preserved okay the myelin is lost which is the sheath around the axons but the axons are preserved and that's helpful in distinguishing uh demyelinating things from things like infarct because in infarct you're going to have loss of everything not just the myelin but also the axons so that's something to keep in mind but i do want to emphasize that if the demyelination is severe you can uh eventually destroy the axons okay this is a lot of physics here which i'm not going to go into but basically the point of myelination in um the nervous system is because of saltatory conduction. Okay, they jump. They jump. The impulses jump. And if you have this nicely intact myelin sheath, impulses are much easier to go down because of the saltatory conduction. Here's another picture where you have on top a very nice saltatory conduction. The action potential goes down. Everything is fine. But in demyelination, that does not happen. So we know that the velocity that the action potential travels down the axon depends on the myelination and the diameter of the fiber. You can have some local current flow in unmyelinated fibers but the better way, the faster way, is the saltatory conduction in myelinated fibers. Okay let's start out with a case that I will introduce the first topic. 33 year old woman complains of urinary incontinence and blurry vision for the past three months. Fundoscopic exam shows no problems. Two months later she develops double vision and numbness in the fingers of her left hand and an MRI shows scattered plaques in both the brain and the spinal cord. Some of these plaques over time diminish in size and others appear in new locations. So these plaques would most likely show selective loss of which of the following proteins. So this is just an introduction to demyelination and obviously the answer here I hope you would figure out is D as in David myelin because we haven't yet talked about beta amyloid which is a something in Alzheimer's disease or synaptopheicin or alphacinaclean which would be Parkinson's disease. So the answer here is D and I'm using this question to introduce multiple sclerosis. Multiple sclerosis is an autoimmune demyelinating disorder and it's chronic. So you get episodes of neurological problems, deficits that are separated in time and separated in space. There's patchy white matter lesions. This is the most common demyelinating disorder and usually it can happen at any age, but childhood or after 50 is rare. And women are affected twice as often as men, which makes sense, especially because it's an autoimmune disease. There's a varying clinical course. It could be relapsing and remitting episodes. It could be weeks, months, years, and gradual and partial recovery of neurological function or possible deterioration. Again, every case is different. So the problem here is that the autoimmune response is against parts of the myelin sheath. This disease has both genetic and environmental factors that contribute to it, like many diseases do. The incidence of multiple sclerosis is 15 times higher if a first degree relative has it. So that is definitely a genetic predisposition. There happens to be a strong association with the DR haplotype of the major histocompatibility complex. There's other associations as well with interleukin-2 and 7 receptor genes, and that's all involved in the immune response. Now, the environmental factors, it's interesting that geographic variation occurs in multiple sclerosis so that there are much higher cases away from the equator, diagnosed away from the equator. And they think maybe that has to do with low level vitamin D, which does kind of modulate the immune system. But again, these things are not definitive, but there definitely is a geographic variation. So the more north you go, the higher the level, and as you get to the equator, decreased. Okay, so the pathogenesis basically right now, as the evidence available, we have from the early 2020s, which was only a couple years ago, is that MS is initiated by T helper 1 and T helper 17 T cells, and that react against myelin antigens. In doing so, they secrete cytokines. The Th1 cells secrete interferon gamma, and if you remember, interferon gamma activates macrophages, and the Th17 cells promote recruitment of white blood cells. So deionation occurs because the activated white blood cells have products that are injurious to the myelin. When you look at the infiltrate in the plaques that make up multiple sclerosis and the surrounding regions you will see a lot of lymphocytes that are T cells mainly CD4 positive some CD8 positive and macrophages. There are therapies that have pharmacologists talk more to you about that modulate or inhibit t-cell responses to help block the recruitment of t -cells to the brain. There is a suspected contribution of humoral immunity because we will see later oleclonal bands occur in the CSF. These are oleclonal bands of immunoglobulins. So to summarize multiple sclerosis is an autoimmune disease or appears to be an autoimmune disease triggered by environmental factors in genetically susceptible individuals. I just want to emphasize this is a white matter disease. When the brain is in the fresh state, meaning you know we've taken the brain out at autopsy and we have not fixed it in formalin or anything, the lesions that you see, the plaques are firmer than the surrounding white matter. And that's where the word sclerosis comes from because sclerosis means hard. These are well circumscribed, sometimes depressed, gray tan lesions, and the actual area of demyelination is often has sharply defined borders. These can be very small or can be very large. The plaques commonly occur near the lateral ventricles and often can occur in the corpus callosum, optic nerves, and other places as listed here. They can sometimes extend to the gray matter, but this is generally a white matter disease. Okay, so this is a fresh brain. You've got two black arrows pointing at the plaques, the multiple sclerosis plaques, and these are periventricular. You see the ventricles there, the lateral ventricles, and they're very well demarcated, and if you were to put a gloved hand on this, it will feel firmer than the surrounding tissue. Okay, I wanted to show you this because the next picture, and often they're symmetrical, by the way, shows a brain. This is also with multiple sclerosis, but this brain has been fixed in formalin. So I don't know what the boards will do to you, whether they'll show you fresh or fixed, but I wanted to show you both. The point is that you can still see lesions here, but they look a little bit different once they're put in formalin. What do we see under the microscope? Well, sometimes they refer to active or acute plaques and inactive or chronic plaques. The point is that an active lesion will have ongoing myelin breakdown, and because the myelin is breaking down, there's going to be a lot of foamy macrophages because myelin is made up of a lot of sphingomyelosin, which is fatty, and you'll see foamy macrophages. You're also going to see lymphocytes, especially around the vessels and at the outer edge of lesions. The active lesions are usually around small veins and myelin is being destroyed or completely absent. Again, most of the time, axons are preserved. Now, anything that happens in this nervous system, especially central nervous system, when you have something like this going on, whether it's loss of neurons, which we'll talk about neurodegenerative or loss of myelin, you will have reactive changes. The astrocytes will become reactive and you get what's called reactive gliosis. Gliosis is the term that we use in the CNS that really means fibrosis. It means like, it's used in the, in replace of the word fibrosis because there's no fibrosis really in the CNS. So the glial cells become reactive, and you get gliosis, not fibrosis. When the plaques are not active, when they're more chronic, they've been around a long time, you don't have the macrophages. Myelin is gone, pretty much, and there's going to be a reduced number of oligodendrocyte nuclei, and that makes sense, because oligodendrocytes are what make myelin in the CNS. and also you'll have the reactive gliosis as I mentioned in the more chronic plaques not the not the active ones okay so it depends on the age of the plaque what you're going to see early ones or whether you call them active or acute you're going to see a lot of myelin breakdown and phagocytosis as I mentioned by macrophages and also inflammatory mononuclear cells notice that these are mononuclear cells which means lymphocytes mostly which is kind of a little strange because we always think of the first responder as a neutrophil but in this case we have lymphocytes. Here in the beginning the lesions are not you don't have a lot of gliosis yet and the axons are spared but as the lesion progresses and becomes more chronic there will be fewer inflammatory cells for your lymphocytes and a lot more gliosis. So this is a really high power of a very active lesion. I don't want to say acute because acute you often think neutrophils so we'll call this an active lesion. Basically you wouldn't know what it is if I didn't tell you. We're really high up on a plaque, high power and you're seeing a lot of blue dots and those are all lymphocytes basically around uh somewhere in there is a vessel. Now this is a high power of a deamyelinated plaque and what you see is that there's less oligodendroglia and um a lot uh an increase in the astrocytic nuclei which are like the fibrillary background where the arrow is there and this happens to be near a ventricle though you cannot see the ventricle here this is high power. okay there are a lot of different myelin stains and some of them are quite pretty this one is a luxulfast blue and so myelin will stain this this royal blue color as you can tell in this lesion which happens to be an early lesion around a vein there's there's no staining around the vein and that's because there's no myelin okay so this is a demy this is how they prove the demyelination. Now in an active lesion in the plaque you can do an oil red O -stain. What is the point of this? This is to show you the fatty or the lipid-laden macrophages because oil red will stain lipids basically and that's because of the breakdown of myelin. Okay the myelin is breaking down and that's got you know what lipids in it and will be taken up by the macrophages. The older plaques or the chronic lesions are not going to have as many mononuclear cells or lymphocytes and there's going to be almost complete demyelination a lot of reactive gliosis a lot okay and we'll talk more about that in subsequent lectures there's going to be oligodendrocyte loss and if it's really bad as i mentioned earlier you can get axonal loss although that's not usually a finding unless it's very severe. So these are basically the same lesion, but one's H&E, the irregular hematoxyl and eosin, and one is the special myelin stain. And what you see is that we've got a lesion around a vein. Now we can't see the ventricle in this picture, but we do see the vein right back in the middle. There isn't much inflammation and it's demyelinated. You see paleness, lighter pink in the H&E and total white in the other myelin stain. This is a good cartoon I think because it helps show what what I mean by reactive astrocytes. Normally there is a bunch of axons myelinated that a normal astrocyte is surrounding, but as it loses its myelin and you see over on the right side there's no more smooth myelin, it's all lost, you'll have more and more reactive astrocytes, which causes the gliosis or astrogliosis that I keep talking about in demyelinated axons. So there are distinct episodes of neural deficits that are separated in time that are attributable to white matter lesions separated in space. How do these patients present? A number of different ways. Weakness in one or more limbs, about 40 percent and you can get motor and sensory impairment of trunks and limbs and spasticity. What's interesting about this disease is remember it's not going to be it's not going to make sense in many ways. A person may say look I'm having tingling in my right arm and I'm having trouble moving my left leg. It doesn't make sense from a neurological point because there are different plaques and different space and time and that's that's the point. One of the frequent initial manifestations is something called optic neuritis where you get unilateral visual impairment because the optic nerve becomes demyelinated and these patients also go on to develop sensory problems. They can also have double vision or vertigo, bladder dysfunction, and other things like that. There are two things that are clinically mentioned. They're old terms but you might want to know about them. When the temperature outside is higher than usual, symptoms will get worse and that's called a toughs phenomenon and when there's also something if you put the if you ask the patient to take their chin and move it down to their chest or in other words bending the neck they will get this kind of lightning bolts kind of feeling an electrical sensation that runs down their back called limited sign. Okay if you do a CSF tap on these people, on these patients, I'm sorry, you're gonna have protein levels that are moderately elevated and moderate pleocytosis in about a third of cases. What does pleocytosis mean? It means there's an increase in white blood cells of the mononuclear type, so lymphocytes. Now there's going to be also an increase in immunoglobulins. Remember this is an autoimmune disease and very significantly, there's an oloclonal, there's oloclonal IgG bands that you do that based on immunoelectrophoresis. And that's very characteristic of multiple sclerosis. And that proves that there's a, or at least it seems that there's a presence of a small number of activated B cell clones in the CNS, though these are thought to be self-reactive. If you did evoked response testing, you might detect slowing, interruption of conduction in many different pathways, whether it be sensory or motor. An MRI is, I think, at this time still the preferred way to follow the disease. The treatment consists of immunosuppression or immunomodulatory agents, which I won't discuss in this lecture. I'm sure you'll get a pharmacology lecture on that. And again, they slow the progression but not really cure the disease. So this is hard to diagnose sometimes. You have to recognize that signs and symptoms represent different lesions and different spots and different ages so they're separated by time and space that's what I keep saying these are this is an MRI it is the preferred method I believe of imaging the brain I say I believe because I'm not a radiologist I'm a pathologist but this is what's used and the the reason why is because brains can appear normal on CT in MS, but you can see the plaques on the MRI as seen here. You can see the white spots here on this side anyway. The diagnosis can't be made though just on MRI and that's important because you can have other neurological diseases that look similar and if you have a normal MRI that does not rule out the diagnosis of multiple sclerosis because about 5% of patients who have MS based on other criteria, clinical and oligoclonal bands, etc. don't show plaques on MRI. So that's important to know. It's a small percentage, but it is. Okay, I want to talk a little bit about this. It used to be that they would divide into little groups as far as clinical progression, four main groups. I spoke to Dr. Lader, who's our neuro neurologist, and apparently the fourth one, progressive relapsing, is no longer used in the literature. So I want to make that clear. What happens is that the disease, most of the disease, can be relapsing remitting. So that, what does that mean? That means discrete attacks or discrete flares and they resolve over weeks or months and they do not progress. Then there's primary progressive and secondary progressive. Primary progressive is chronic progression obviously from the start and secondary progression progressive is relapsing and remitting initially and then gradual progression and eventual permanent disability. Now progressive relapsing as I said is no longer a term that is used in the literature and though they do have other terms such as clinically isolated syndrome and radiologically isolated syndrome. This is just to let you know that not every case of multiple sclerosis follows the same clinical path. Okay, I want to mention these three. I will not test you on them, but I think it's important to know because in the CNS-D myelinating diseases, it's not just multiple sclerosis, even though that's the most common. So these three are neuromyelitis optica, acute disseminated encephalomyelitis, and acute necrotizing hemorrhagic encephalomyelitis. so in neuromyelitis optica you have bilateral optic neuritis and spinal cord demyelination at the same time it was considered a variant of multiple sclerosis but now it's considered to be a distinct disorder and it usually has is more commonly associated with poor recovery from the first attack and one thing that is associated with is aquaporin for antibodies the next one Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis is not a good disease. Diffuse monophasic demyelinating disease. It usually follows a viral infection or sometimes immunization, viral immunization. Symptoms will occur one or two weeks later. People develop headaches, lethargy, and coma and unfortunately this is a rapid clinical course and has a high mortality rate of 20% and some patients will remain you know disabled and some will recover completely. Acute necrotizing hemorrhagic encephaly myelitis it sounds as bad as it is it's really a fulminant syndrome and it happens in young adults and children usually preceded by an upper respiratory infection of an unknown cause and it can be fatal and the survivors can have significant deficits. So I mention you this to just make a complete story in the demyelinating diseases. I mentioned this because this comes up a lot in medicine, the central pontine myelonosis, also known as osmotic demyelination syndromes. This happens when you rapidly correct hyponatremia, okay, or any other severe electrolyte disturbance or osmolar imbalance. So acutely what happens is there's loss of myelin and it's in the base of the ponds and roughly in a symmetric pattern and that's what you see there on the bottom where there's two black they well first the picture in the middle you see the white arrow and the two black arrows and in the picture over on the right and you see a little inset here blue again is the myelin this is the ponds and that white area is demyelination. So they don't know why increases in osmolality or the rapid correction, the mechanisms are not thoroughly established. They do know there's no inflammation and that the neurons and axons are pretty well preserved. And all the lesions, because it's synchronous onset of damage, will be at the same stage of myelin loss and reaction. That's different than MS. And it can involve most parts of the brain, but mostly it's the pons. What happens is a clinically rapidly evolving quadriplegia, and that's not very good at all. Fatal or long-term deficits, and the patients will develop the locked -in syndrome where they're fully conscious but cannot move. It's horrible. It's absolutely horrible. So the take-home message, which this one is hyponatremia must be corrected slowly and carefully. So I wanted to mention this one as well. Here's a case question to bring up the next topic of demyelination and this is a 41 year old woman who has a flu-like illness for one week and later she experiences a rapidly progressive ascending motor weakness which we'll talk more about what that means and requires intubation and mechanical ventilation. They do a CSF tap, and there's clear colorless spinal fluid under normal pressure with a slightly elevated protein concentration, normal glucose levels, and only a few lymphocytes. Now, so again, this does not sound like meningitis because you would have a cloudy fluid in white blood cells, a lot of neutrophils. In this case, the patient recovered in three weeks. Now, If, and you don't go around doing biopsies on this case, if lymphocyte infiltrates were seen in the peripheral nerves along with segmental demyelination, what would be the most likely diagnosis? This is a first order question that you're not likely to get, but it's the point is I'm trying to introduce this disease. And what this disease is, is not multiple sclerosis. We haven't talked about ALS or the others yet, but Guillain -Barre syndrome, D as in David, is the answer here. So what is Guillain -Barre syndrome? The other name is acute inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy. It's very acute onset and it's immune mediated and it's in the peripheral neuropathy. It's not in the brain, it's periphery. That's the difference. It can lead to fatal life-threatening respiratory paralysis and the weakness will begin distally and then rapidly goes proximally. That's what an ascending paralysis is. So they have distal problems and then it becomes more proximal. If you were to look at a peripheral nerve that is involved, you will see inflammation, lymphocytes, and segmental demyelination of spinal roots and the peripheral nerves. Again, two-thirds of the cases can be preceded by an acute kind of viral illness like the flu, or flu-like I should say, and they have had studies where their infections with things like CMV and Campylobacter and EBV and mycoplasma pneumonia and prior vaccination are also associated with Guillain-Barre, but as of yet has not found an infectious agent in the nerves. So you're going to have this inflammation of the nerves and the infiltrated lymphocytes and macrophages maybe a few plasma cells but not neutrophils okay again it's not neutrophils segmental demyelination means there's demyelination in segments and it affects peripheral nerves the damage to axons if severe there is damage to axons but the most lichen ms is mostly preserved and schwann cells are preserved now why am i mentioning schwann cells and cell oligodendrocytes because Schwann cells are the myelinating cells of the peripheral nervous system whereas the oligodendrocytes do the central nervous system. If you did electron microscopy you would see the myelin sheath already being affected and again I usually don't use electron microscopy but that tells you how it's showing that they're stripping of the myelin sheath from the axon so eventually you'll get the myelin sheath engulfed by macrophages and you'll get the inflammation and demyelination which can be quite widespread so this is another pretty myelin stain where basically the myelin stains pink or magenta and the green is loss of myelin and you see here this is a peripheral nerve again you don't usually do biopsies on these but this is what it would look like and here's another picture of a very high power of basically all the lymphocytes in the inflammation in in the peripheral nerve and you do see residual myelinated axons if you see the black arrow over here on the left and it shows a very pink very pink line those are axons that are preserved and the white bubbly appearing stuff surrounding them are the myelin sheaths some of which are there and some of which are gone so that's why it's demyelinating. So again please remember the ascending paralysis and reflexes there are no areflexia deep tendon reflexes usually disappear that's another important clinical sign there can be sensory involvement loss of pain sensation, that can be very prominent. If you did nerve conduction velocities, they would be slowed down because there's multifocal destruction of myelin segments. CSF levels, the protein levels will be elevated because there's inflammation and altered permeability of the circulation, the microcirculation in the spinal roots. But the inflammatory cells are kind of confined to the roots and you really don't get much CSF pleocytosis or inflammation. Many patients can spend weeks in the intensive care unit before recovering, if they recover. Nowadays, we have better ICUs, better supportive respiratory care, cardiovascular monitoring, so the mortality rate isn't as bad as it used to be, but can be high. Plasmapheresis and IV immunoglobulin therapy is helpful because what do they do? They remove the antibodies and suppress the immune function. Despite this two to five percent of patients will die eventually of respiratory paralysis or cardiac arrest or something else like autonomic instability and up to 20% of patients who do end up in the hospital will suffer long-term disability. Okay now we're going to move on to leukodystrophies and I'm only going to mentioned three there are many many different types these are genetic metabolic disorder and rather than demyelinating the books like to refer them as dysmyelinating because the myelin is forming but it's abnormal in formation and the myelin is not stable so the myelin isn't damaged but the way it's formed is is abnormal and in general leukodystrophies are insidious and progressive and usually happen in children, especially infants, and are a result of lysosomal or perioxosomal enzyme defects. It can involve both the central and the peripheral nervous system. Unfortunately, these are progressive diseases that result in death at an early age. And the earlier onset, the more severe clinically. So this is biochemistry. And what you see here are reactions and the green ones are the things to remember well the red is the disease name and the green are the enzymes that are deficient so we're going to talk about metachromatic leukodystrophy and crabb's disease and also another one the al sulfatase a is the enzyme deficiency in metachromatic leukodystrophy and galactocerebroside beta galactocerebrosidase I wish there was an acronym for that. I don't know it though, is the one in Crabb's disease that's deficient. So let's talk first about metachromatic leukodystrophy. This is an autosomal recessive disease. I told you these were genetic and the lysosomal enzyme that is deficient is aryl sulfatase A. What that enzyme normally does is cleaves sulfate from sulfate containing lipids. And that leads to, if you don't have that enzyme, you will lead to accumulation of sulfatides, okay? Especially cerebriside sulfate, which is toxic to white matter. So demyelination will result in gliosis because gliosis is a reactive change in the nervous system. You'll see macrophages with vaculated cytoplasms. And the interesting thing, why is is called metachromatic but remember the word metaplasia change well metachromatic means a change in color okay so basically there are membrane bound vacuoles that have these crystalloid structures is made of sulfatides when they bind certain kinds of dyes the sulfatides will shift the spectrum the absorbent spectrum so they change color that's what metachromasia is so you get a blue dye that comes out. It's blue when you when you use it and then it comes out looking red. This similar metachromatic stuff happens in peripheral nerves and in urine and in fact they do a urine test which is a sensitive method for diagnosis. There are many clinical subtypes which we will not go into but in this case we've got a slide, a stain which was originally cressyl violet would have been a nice deep purple and with this disease it stains this this red this deep red. The next one crabby disease or globoid cell leukodystrophy is also autosomal recessive and the enzyme deficiency like I mentioned is galactocerebroside beta-galactosidase. You need this enzyme for catabolism of galactocerebroside to the ceramide and galactose. because you don't have that enzyme and you have the impaired catabolism you'll have alternate catabolic pathways and that shunts the galactosurubicide to galactosphilosphingosine then you get the elevated levels of the galactosphilosphingosine which is toxic to oligodendrocytes and the brain will show loss of myelin and oligodendrocytes and also the peripheral nerves The diagnostic feature is these globoid cells or globoid cells, which are aggregation of engorged macrophages in the brain and around the blood vessels. Now, obviously, this is usually autopsy, but that's what you would see on the tissue. And this is a section of brain that was affected by Krabs disease. And you see basically the blue arrows are showing the globoids. They look like globes or something like that. And the black arrow is just showing gliosis, again, the astrocytes that are reactive. The last one I want to talk about is adrenoleukodystrophy, which is not autosomal or something. It is excellent recessive, and I believe was the subject of a movie many, many years ago called Lorenzo's Oil. Here, there's loss of function mutations in ABCD1. Okay, what is ABCD1? Well, it encodes an ATP binding cassette transporter protein. You need that to transport fatty acids into paroxomes. So usually these are boys that are affected and they will have behavioral changes and adrenal insufficiency. And the loss of this ABCD1 also leads to inability to catabolize very long chain fatty acids. So in their serum, the boys will have elevated serum levels of very long chain fatty acids. The symptoms are progressive. They involve the adrenal gland as well as the CNS and the PNS. And you'll have CNS myelin loss. And along with myelin loss is gliosis and lymphocytic infiltration. And there will be adrenal cortical atrophy. So they will lose cortisol. This is another myelin stain. And here again, the white matter WM is ***** in the middle, and it's pale because it's not staining. The myelin's not there. It should be that blue color that you see over on the right-hand side. Okay, I'm not going to go through this extensively, but there are a lot of other metabolic genetic diseases. If you go into neonatology of pediatrics, this would be very important. Other leukodystrophies mentioned here include things like Alexander disease, and these are again defects in lipid metabolism. Neuronal storage diseases, there are many. They are genetically heterogeneous and usually they're caused by enzyme deficits or defects in protein or lipids trafficking in neurons. So you get the storage material in the neurons and the neurons then die. And the mitochondrial encephalomyopathies really are more relevant in the skeletal muscle pathology. These are diseases of energy generation caused by a range of neurological disease and includes a lot of different things, including M-E-L-A-S-M-E-L -A-S, mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis, and ******-like episodes. So you can read about this. Again, it's important to know that they exist, and my understanding is some of them, like the mitochondrial ones might appear on the boards. Okay, so case question. We're going to do a little bit review here. Six-month -old girl with metachromatic leukodystrophy fails to thrive, dies of respiratory insufficiency. Histo-exam of the brain at autopsy shows marked accumulation of metachromatic material and in the white matter and prominent astrogliosis. So the lab studies confirm an accumulation of cerebrocyte so she has an inborn error metabolism which is the deficiency what enzyme is deficient so hopefully i mean the only one you recognize that i've talked about in here is um d as in david aryl sulfatase a so and we're told it's metachromatic leukodystrophy they wouldn't be so nice on the boards they probably say you know something changed the color from red to blue blue to red another question an eight-month-old boy exhibits severe motor sensory and cognitive impairments. Brain biopsy, and they rarely do that but they can, shows a disease of white matter characterized by the accumulation of globoid cells. The biochemical studies reveal absence of galactosteroboside beta-galactosidase. So what is the diagnosis? This is a primary question, a first-order question I should say, And again, it's just meant to reinforce that this is crab disease, crabby disease C, C as in Charlie. Another case question, we have, and this is now I'm going to introduce the last topic. A 27-year-old man presents with dementia, weakness, visual loss, and ataxia one year after getting a cadaveric kidney transplant. Which of the following is the most likely cause of this patient's CNS disorder? Now this is kind of not fair because I haven't discussed it yet. The point of this question is that it's a kidney transplant. So a 27-year-old man with a kidney transplant is going to be immunosuppressed, right? That's there on immunosuppressed agents. So what I'm trying to introduce to you is the disease is not going to be adrenal leukodystrophy or metachromatic leukodystrophy. We've already discussed that. I believe subacute sclerosing panencephalitis is something associated with measles. So the answer is D as in David, progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy or better stated as PML. This is a viral encephalitis that's caused by a virus. The name of the virus is JCPolyomavirus. Why this happens is because the virus will preferentially infect oligodendrocytes and because oligodendrocytes are important in myelination, that you'll get demyelination because the virus will infect them. Now, about 65 % of the population normally has evidence serologically of exposure to this virus by their teen years. So, immuno-intact people do not get this, but the virus is reactivated when you're immunosuppressed, such as in transplants, chemotherapy, AIDS. So, immunosuppressed patients are the ones at risk because you have to reactivate the virus. clinically there are focal symptoms depending on where it is and they're progressive and usually pretty extensive multifocal thus the name a cerebral or cerebellar demyelinated lesions that you can see these on ct or mri you'll see patches of irregular ill -defined destruction of white matter often it's underneath the cortex and in the center you're going to get those lipid-laden macrophages again because those are the ones that eat up the myelin which has lipids in it. At the edge of the lesions you'll see very enlarged oligodendrocyte nuclei because this virus goes into the nucleus of the oligodendrocyte and you'll get this viral inclusions. They're glassy and they're amphiphilic which means they're kind of like a both a pink they're magenta color basically. And of course along with that astrogliosis sometimes very bizarre reactive gliosis. So this is another myelin stain which is supposed to be black but that you see the white patches here so you have demyelination in this disease. What you see here are on top the blue arrow over in the left hand corner on the top is basically an oligodendrocyte nucleus that has been affected by this virus, JC polyvirus, and it has this magenta color. It's amphophilic is another term for it. There are very bad reactive, by bad I'm saying they look really ugly, like the black arrows show these really, you know, big cells with really bizarre looking features. I mean, if you weren't careful you would think they're malignant but they're not malignant because there's plenty of cytoplasm usually malignancy the nuclear cytoplasmic ratio is reduced so these are just very reactive uh strange bizarre astrogliosis cells if you did em these are what the jc virus particles look like within the oligodendroglial nucleus they're all these little viral particles So this is the summary slide. I believe there are two and the lecture feedback form. Thank you for your attention and please feel free to email me. You come by my office and I'll be happy to answer any questions. Thank you.