Hello, class. This lecture will focus on the pharmacology of multiple sclerosis. And this is a neurological disease of demyelination where the patient will experience neuronal loss and ultimately disability. With this disease, as patients progress, there will be episodes where patients can have worsening of symptoms. One of the main ones is optic neuritis, and this is going to be managed with glucocorticoids or corticosteroids is another name for them. So I will review the mechanism of glucocorticoids in this lecture and some of the adverse effects. Understand that with MS, there's going to be an increase in pathological lymphocytes and macrophages, and they are going to degrade myelin sheath. And myelin is supposed to protect the neurons. So without it, ultimately what will happen is that the neurons are going to die. So many of the treatments are going to be immunotherapies. They're going to work to somehow decrease these T lymphocytes and B lymphocytes. There'll be some of them that bind to specific targets, and some of these drugs you will revisit again when you do cancer chemotherapy. So I will go through the adverse effects. And one thing to note with adverse effects as a group, these drugs do cause some level of immunosuppression. So we need to be mindful of patients now getting infections. So if the patient presents with fever, malaise, sore throat, it's a good idea to check the complete blood count. And with many of these drugs, you will have to do this before starting the treatment and throughout therapy. Same thing, You need to order a CMP to look at the patient's liver panel or their kidney function. The other thing is that MS does present with other symptoms. So they may experience depression. They may have trouble with incontinence. They may have erectile dysfunction. So it's not just going to be the immunotherapy. we will be using other drugs to manage these symptoms and I will go through some of the most common ones in the lecture. So MS is relapsing or progressive okay and probably the most common is the relapsing remitting form of MS where the patient has the disorder but has periods of remission and that is really the goal of therapy is to keep the patient in remission as much as possible. You want to slow the progression of the disease. So with demyelination, we're going to have an increase of B and T cells that are pathological. This is mediated by T helper cell 1 and 17. T helper cell 2, which is the target of one of the drugs I will discuss, glatiromir, actually enhances Th2, which can actually be a therapeutic because it has an anti -inflammatory property. MS tends to happen more in females versus males. You are diagnosed younger, meaning by the time somebody is between 20 and 30 years old, they will be diagnosed. It's very rare to see somebody in their 60s present for the first time with symptoms of MS. Genetics can play a role. Smoking, even though we think about the lungs and the heart and atherosclerosis, remember smoking does introduce ROSs, which has been implicated to be part of the pathogenesis of MS. And we do have a drug that actually works against ROS production. And then Epstein -Barr has been shown to perhaps be implicated in MS because they see that in many patients with MS, they have the presence of antibodies of Epstein -Barr in their blood. And remember, when you are showing antibodies, that means either you got the vaccine, which we don't have one for Epstein -Barr, or you've been exposed to the virus. And then lastly, vitamin D. Even though vitamin D initially, and it still is, needed to absorb your calcium for bone health, there's been a lot of disorders that have been attributed to maybe having low vitamin D levels, whether it be neurological diseases, even Parkinson's, Alzheimer's, MS, and even some cancers. So this is why I have this in question mark. So here is what we need to understand. We have these reactive or pathological T cells that are outside the CNS, and they're going to cross the blood -brain barrier inside. And what will happen is you're going to get an increase of cytokines, and that's going to turn on the B -cells, which are going to be responsible for creating autoantibodies to the myelin, or we're going to have an increase in cytotoxic T-cells, which increase granzymes, and granzymes are responsible for enhancing apoptosis or cell death. So, as I mentioned, many of the therapies are going to be against the B-cells or the T cells. And we do have a drug that binds to the receptor here. And I will speak about it a little bit later. It's called natalizumab. And this drug, by binding here, prevents the entry of the T cells into the CNS. So for acute management of MS symptoms, we use glucocorticoids. Now glucocorticoids, as I mentioned, we need to be mindful that there are certain adverse effects. Number one, you never discontinue a glucocorticoid flat. You need to taper off. Even if you're going from an IV form to maybe an oral prednisone or even later to an inhaled form, you need to have a few days where the patient is getting a lowering of the dose. That's because leukocorticoids can have an effect on hypothalamic pituitary axis suppression. This is almost like when you remove the drug, the body doesn't know what to do at that moment. do we make more corticosteroid naturally or we don't and what ends up happening in that time period the patient can actually get a reactivation of symptoms so you want to taper these medications and IV methylprednisolone is actually the first medication that we will give for optic neuritis Optic neuritis in the MS patient results from an autoimmune damage to the myelin of the optic nerve. The patient will present with eye pain and they're going to have difficulty seeing. The rest of these drugs are going to be mainly for the relapsing remitting component. And as I mentioned, this is when the patient has the disorder but is able to be maintained in remission and is able to do all their functions. Ultimately, we're slowing the disease progression with these medications. The issue is when the patient goes into secondary progressive. That is now when they're getting a worsening of their disease, almost like they're turning the corner. And that's when we will give mitoxantrone. And this is an anti-neoplastic. So you will study this again later when you do chemotherapy. and then cladribine is another one and this one can be used for the relapsing remitting by the way the cladribine so glucocorticoids I want to stay say that as a mechanism they're stopping everything from the beginning so for example when we're talking about prostaglandins one way that that can be manage is by giving a cyclooxygenase blocker, like an NSAID, whether it be Advil or Motrin, which is ibuprofen. And by blocking COX, you're not going to make prostaglandin E2. And this is what's responsible for giving you the pain and inflammation you feel when, say, you pull a muscle. Aspirin, in addition, targets thromboxane, and thromboxane is responsible for platelet aggregation. We give lots of aspirin, like 81 milligrams every day, to those patients that have had a cardiac issue. So if they've had an MI or a ****** in the past, they usually will be put on 81 milligrams a day, not for the anti -inflammatory, but for the fact that this is going to block platelets. On the side here, which I talk about the lung pathway, Anyway, lipooxygenase is blocked by ziluton, and the leukotriene D4 receptor is blocked by the leukast drugs, like montalukast, pranlukast. These will be drugs that you would use, for example, if you have somebody with asthma, maybe COPD, maybe allergic-induced asthma. But as I said, we have specific drugs on each side of the tree. but the one that blocks everything from the starting point is going to be glucocorticoids. These drugs will stimulate lipocortin and by doing that they inhibit phospholipase A2. So once that happens and you don't have arachnodonic acid, you can't make either glucotrienes or prostaglandins. So this is why glucocorticoids can be used for say patients that are having an exacerbation of asthma, and they're presenting to the ED, and they need to be given IV methylprednisolone, or maybe somebody who perhaps has inflammatory bowel disease, okay, may need a glucocorticoid because that patient is getting a lot of symptoms related to inflammation. Okay, so these drugs are widely used. They should be used sparingly, but they are used for many different inflammatory conditions. How they work is through a nuclear receptor mechanism where you're going to affect nuclear transcription or gene transcription. So right now we see that the drug is binding to its binding globulin and it enters the cell. Receptors are maintained stable by heat shock proteins. Once the drug binds to the receptor, these dissociate, and now your receptor drug or receptor ligand complex is unstable. This allows now for dimerization to happen, which continues in the nucleus. And this happens on response elements. So this is the glucocorticoid response element. Thyroid hormone, estrogen hormone, progesterone, the fat-soluble vitamins like D, E, K, and A, they're all going to have their specific response element. So you'll see for thyroid, this will be thyroid response element. And you're going to get the activation of gene transcription. Messenger RNA is going to now create protein, and you're going to get a response. So glucocorticoids, as I mentioned, should be used sparingly because over time, and this is especially true in those pediatric patients who have gotten various courses of glucocorticoid for asthma, there tends to be a decrease in growth hormone. That's why we see that kids that are given too much glucocorticoids early in their life tend not to grow as much as their peers. In addition, this is going to have an effect on metabolism. You're going to get an increase in gluconeogenesis, which means the liver is making more glucose. That can complicate somebody that has diabetes. You're also going to get some issue where the patient can't affect, their adipose tissue is affected. So they're going to present with that cushionoid effect where they're going to be somewhat round in their belly. They're going to have the moon face. And incidentally, when we're talking about the skin, especially in the extremities, they lose muscle. So it's going to be almost like they're skinny, so to speak, in their extremities, but they're going to have like a belly. And that has to do with the fact that you're getting redistribution of the fat. It also can increase free fatty acid production, so you could get an increase in your lipid panel. The other thing is that since this drug can affect aldosterone, aldosterone being increased can increase salt and water retention. And that can lead to edema or it can lead to hypertension. And then lastly, it's the bone. This is the big problem and why a lot of doctors don't like to get repeated injections of glucocorticoids when you're in pain. With the bone, these drugs increase osteoclasts. And remember, osteoclasts can break down bone. The other thing is that they have a negative impact on vitamin D. So if you're excreting vitamin D or you can't absorb vitamin D, therefore you cannot absorb calcium. So this is another mechanism by how these drugs can negatively affect bone. So here we are with allentuzumab. And this is an interesting medication because it's going to break down T and B cells. It's going to bind, of course, to CD52. So as you can see here, number one, we're going to have complement dependent cytotoxicity. What does that mean? Well, you're going to see that the antibody will bind to the antigen and then you're going to get an increase, once they bind together and they activate, you're going to get an increase of membrane attack complex and that is going to lead to cell lysis. So that's one mechanism. The other one is due to this antibody dependent cell mediated cytotoxicity. This is where now the drug comes in and it coats the target with these antibodies and then following that you're going to get the breakdown of CD52 of the T and the B cells. Okay, so basically this has to do now with coding of the drug to the effector cells. And then lastly would be the fact that you're going to get apoptosis. Okay, and remember, apoptosis is programmed cell death. You're going to have an increase in caspases in this mechanism. And ultimately, again, you're going to get cell death. Some of the issues here is that, number one, it is advised that anybody considering pregnancy does use some form of contraception, okay? The other thing is, as mentioned, you're going to get a depletion of lymphocytes, which again makes the patient at a greater risk of developing an infection. The antibodies here, they're antibodies that can be formed and can cause something called an autoimmune response. One place this could happen is in the thyroid, and you will get a resulting thyroiditis. So if the patient presents with symptoms of hypothyroidism, whether they're cold all the time, losing their hair, they're having fatigue, weight gain, constipation, a decrease in cardiac effects, you would try to look at the patient's thyroid panel. And then the other thing is that patients can experience an autoimmune thrombocytopenia. So again, it's very advisable, as mentioned in the first slide, that you do the CBC because you can see the platelets on the CBC. So that will be important to monitor. Infusion reactions are going to happen with many of these drugs. And this is important because for the most part, they can be annoying to the patient. However, there's ways that we can manage that. We can give pretreatment with an antihistamine. That's usually the main one that we would do. Monitor the patient afterwards. Okay, so we'll go over this again. As mentioned, alimtuzumab can be used for chronic lymphocytic leukemia and T-cell lymphoma. Why? Because ultimately what you would want to achieve in that situation is cell lysis. Just a little bit about monoclonal antibodies. You're going to see many of them, whether it be here and as you go through the year when you do cancer chemotherapy these are being you know bought to market very often okay because that's pretty much the new wave of cancer chemotherapy because you're targeting a specific target instead of giving a drug that's going to affect all of the cells in your body and cause adverse effects so when you see a umab that means that the monoclonal is made of only human construct. A momab is mouse or murine. A gzimab is chimeric which means it's a mixture of both mouse and human. And then a zoomab is humanized. That means there is some degree of mouse in the construct but not as much as compared to chimeric. So what does this mean to you? The idea here is that some people can get an immune response if the construct is obtained from the animal. So that would mean that they may have more effects. So as much as possible, we try to make these constructs human. But again, it's not always a possibility. So it's important that if you're giving something that has an an animal construct, the patient can feel that antigenic effect and that can elicit an immune response and that can change the course of therapy. So it would just be important for you to note when this medication is infused and to watch them for adverse effects. So dimethylfumarate is considered to be a prodrug that is activated to a metabolite known as monomethylfumarate. And that now will activate NRF2. And NRF2 is now going to arrive in the nucleus, kind of like what we saw a few minutes ago with glucocorticoids. And it's going to find an antioxidant response element. And you're going to get dimerization. And with this dimerization, you're going to get the production of antioxidants. And the one that is mostly the one that we want to achieve is glutathione. And glutathione is made by our liver. We do make, I don't recall off the top of my head how many millimoles we make in a day, but that is our own natural protectant. This will increase its production because, as mentioned, there is a component of MS pathology that might be due to activation of ROSs. The other thing it can do is it does have some anti -inflammatory effects. Some of these mediators are anti -inflammatory. And that does help prevent the activation of those toxic lymphocytes. Some of the adverse effects that we will go through here is that patients can experience GI upset, okay, flushing, and something called a progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy or a PML. This is interesting. It tends to happen in patients that are immunosuppressed like an HIV patient, and this is due to the fact that there's an activation of a JC virus in the white matter of the brain. It's called John Cunningham virus. And it seems to be that we all have some level of that in the brain, but it becomes activated when you are immunosuppressed. Now, if you put one of these drugs on board, that can activate this virus. And what will happen is the patient will present with a loss of coordination, memory, weakness. So that would be critical, that you stop the medication and that you evaluate the patient if this should happen. Elevated liver enzymes, because again, the site of action here is somewhat in the liver, especially when we talk about glutathione and where it comes from, where it's made. And then an increase in infection risk. The next one is known as a modulator, and we call it fingolomod. It's a modulator of immune response. This is an interesting medication. It's kind of exciting. This is a drug that will bind to this sphingosine 1 -phosphate 1 receptor. And by doing that, as you can see, it starts to capture lymphocytes. and it takes lymphocytes in, and it sequesters lymphocytes. Sequesters means that it holds it in one place until the lysosomes now are ready to absorb them and break them down. Okay, so this is the way it reduces the toxic lymphocytes, by breaking them down. Very interesting medication. it does have adverse effects. There can be some headaches, some activation of infections like everything else, and then PML, especially if we were dealing with somebody who was immunosuppressed. It can cause basal cell carcinoma. They're not sure why this is happening. They tend to think that it's when you give this with something like natalizumab. Again, if the patient, you know, has moles and they start to see that something is off, that the mole is changing, that's something that they need to have looked at. The other thing is you need to test your varicella antibodies. So varicella is the virus of the chicken pox and the shingles. If this is activated in say patients that are older, you may get a patient that gets shingles. So if you look at the antibody and you feel that they're not in the right range, what the recommendation is, get them the shot, the shingrix, okay, that's the ****** zoster virus drug vaccine. Give them the vaccine and then they can start the drug probably, you know, maybe a month later. Okay. But we want to make sure that they're not going to get an activation of the shingles. Okay. The other thing is we need to evaluate at the first dose. And if you give the drug again, we want to do an EKG because there's been episodes of patients having bradycardia when taking fingolimod. And bradycardia means that the patient is having a lowering of their heart rate. Usually it's below 60 beats per minute. Why is this happening? Is that there's these sphingosine receptors in the AV and SA node of the heart. The SA node is the pacemaker. The AV node is one of those nodes. It's the atrial ventricular node. It's between the atria and the ventricles, and that's going to slow down the rate. So if we had a problem with our AV node, we can have a heart rate of like 400, okay? In this case there may be a decrease in AV node suppression and that can lead to the bradycardia. You'll understand more when we do cardiac next fall. But the thing to understand is when the drug binds to the sphingosine receptors in the heart there's going to be an increase in potassium flow inside and that can lead to a decrease in heart rate. So this would be especially important if say the patient wasn't on an AV node suppressing like a beta blocker or a calcium channel blocker. You may need to change the dose of the cardiac medication or maybe even find another medication for the MS. But either way, you need to make sure that the patient is having regular EKGs to look at the heart rate and looking at the overall rhythm of the heart. Glatiramir, this is the one that I had mentioned, was responsible for increasing TH2. And TH2 tends to be an anti-inflammatory cytokine. So that is actually protective to patients that have MS. So a little bit about this medication is that it is given subcutaneously. It also will increase something called brain -derived neurotropic factor, BDNF. And this one actually helps the nerve cells survive. So in essence, it's increasing neurons. The more neurons you produce, so to speak, from this factor, the more neuroprotection. Because we have more neurons that are going to have myelin. So that is very protective in somebody with MS. A couple of things that we have to be mindful of is the injection site reaction. And so again, why do infusion reactions occur? Seems to be due to the fact that when you infuse these medications, there's going to be an increase in IgE. And IgE is going to be related to an increase of histamine. So giving an antihistamine like diphenhydramine is very important to help manage these reactions. The infusion reactions can also be due to an increase in cytokines. Some physicians may say, well, I want to give a small dose of a glucocorticoid. That may not be incorrect, but again, you want to be mindful of the dose of glucocorticoid. Post-injection, patients can feel flushing, dyspnea or shortness of breath, and some palpitations. This occurs only once, but it's a good idea that the patient is monitored in that period of time because they may get some level of panic. They may be worried about the racing heart. So they should be advised to somewhat be seated and wait a while before going on with the rest of their day. The other thing is that with any subcutaneous injection, whether it be this or when I lecture on insulin next year, subcutaneous injections can can lead to something called lipoatrophy this is where there's a loss of fat at the injection site it tends to be due to an autoimmune response and basically if you see what happens it's almost like an indentation if you look it up on google you'll see that the place where they inject it it's kind of flat and then the rest of the the arm so to speak is the same. It's fatter. One thing to do in order to prevent this from happening is to rotate the injection site. And we say that to patients that are using insulin. Don't inject in the same site. If you inject in the arm today, maybe inject in the leg tomorrow or the other arm the next day. This way you stop this idea of this loss of fat. Interferon. Very important because interferon will see it again next year when we talk about hepatitis B and C. This is a cytokine. For MS, ultimately what we're going to do is inhibit T-cell activation and the cross through the blood-brain barrier. It works via the Janus kinase and signal transduction and activation of transcription pathway. So the drug binds, cytoplasm, you're going to get an increase in signal transduction and activation of transcription because kinases phosphorylate. This phosphorylation reaction continues now into the nucleus where, again, we're finding a response element. So you're getting that dimerization reaction happening again. But it's due to the phosphorylations made possible by Janus kinase. With respect to treating or managing hepatitis B and C, that's going to elicit antiviral immunity. For the specific one that is for MS, B1A, that is going to do this action. Stop T-cells from being activated and stop the cross over. This medication is effective, but it can cause flu -like symptoms. So the patient is going to have several days of feeling weak. They're going to feel tired. They may have a fever. They may have a sore throat. They're going to have some depression. And we see this commonly in patients that are using this for all of these disorders. It seems to be that there is a decrease in neurotransmitter production with interferon. And for depression, that's going to be mostly serotonin. When we talk about injection reactions, again, we might need to give an antihistamine if the patient is sensitive to these infusion reactions. And then lastly, anemia. It seems to be that interferons can suppress something known as erythropoiesis. Erythro applies to the red blood cells. So if you're not making blood cells, then the patient is going to be more prone to being anemic okay so again going back to the lab test you want to order a CBC is always on the list so now we have natalizumab okay I call it we used to call it natalie okay just as a way for us to remember but anyway this drug binds to a receptor as you can see here this is called alpha 4 B1, okay? And this is going to stop, okay, or inhibit adhesion to this specific molecule, VCAM. VCAM stands for vascular cell adhesion molecule 1. So if this is going to be stopped. You're not going to get adhesion. No adhesion, no crossover. And as I mentioned, once you cross over, that's when it starts to interact with the neurons and cause the myelination. So this is preventing the crossover, so to speak. Okay. Very exciting mechanism of action, okay? But again, the infusion reactions, the increase in PML, again, back to the JC virus, hepatotoxicity, so we got to do our liver function tests with this one, and there's an increase in infection risk, okay? I can't say it enough. And natalizumab can also be used for Crohn's disease. Crohn's disease is another inflammatory disorder. Usually the main treatment is the TNF-alpha drugs, which are also monoclonals, like infliximab, adeolimumab. Those will be discussed in later days, but this one can sometimes be used if the patient is not responding well to those TNF -alpha inhibitors. So CD20, very important. When I think of CD20, the first thing I think of is the B cells, okay? And that's what these drugs are doing. They're going to be given as an IV infusion. They're going to deplete CD20 in both the B and also the T cells. And with these drugs, it's been observed that they can also stop brain lesions that we see on the MRI of MS patients. So as you can see, rituximab is trimeric. It's going to work mainly somewhat by antibody-dependent cytotoxicity and then complement-dependent cytotoxicity. aqualizumab is a fully humanized one it has more action in the antibody dependent cytotoxicity the other thing to know is that over time even though these are still widely used there's different forms and you can see that rituximab is in fact trimeric this is humanized, this is fully human. The newest one, U-biltuximab, is chimeric. But one thing that's interesting and very, very convenient is that it's given every six months. So instead of the patient having to come for monthly infusions, this one carries the benefit that the patient does not have to come every month. They can come every six months, provided that they can tolerate the chimeric, the antigenic possibility. If they don't get those side effects, this will be a good one for them. Again, infusion reactions can occur, and we know that we can manage this with an antihistamine like diphenhydramine. You can get a higher risk of all infections, respiratory, all viral infections, including hepatitis B. So that's another one that we may want to check before we start this medication. Check their titers. Do they need another booster of hepatitis B? Maybe, maybe not. But remember, these vaccines should be on board before you start the medication. And you need to give a good amount of time. Usually they say like a month or so. Teriflunamide is a metabolite of leflunamide. This is used in rheumatoid arthritis. This drug inhibits an enzyme known as dihydroorotate dehydrogenase. And that's going to inhibit something known as pyrimidines. and pyrimidines and purines they're involved in synthesis of DNA, RNA and there's going to be more of these when you do cancer chemotherapy you're going to see a bunch and probably the one that's the biggest one is methotrexate but methotrexate is a purine it's going to affect purines this is pyrimidines what's going to happen for patients that have MS, no pyrimidines, no DNA and RNA synthesis, no cell proliferation. Other things pyrimidine block can do is to stop phospholipids from being made, so you won't have lipid messengers. And it also will inhibit protein glycosylation. And that's going to make it that you're not producing cell surface molecules like receptors of some sort. But with MS, this is our goal. So if you're not making RNA and DNA, that means you're not letting your lymphocytes live, so to speak. So again, infections is there, hepatotoxicity. So you want to do a liver function test. And the other thing is anything that affects purines, pyrimidines, ultimately DNA, RNA, nucleic acids, is going to affect somebody of childbearing age, especially if they are considering becoming pregnant or are pregnant. That's where we start to get teratogenic effects. So remember, with methotrexate and the lack of purines, probably the biggest adverse effect that we see is neural tube defects. So the idea here is, if you were to give teraflunamide, make sure that you're doing a pregnancy test in those patients that could be pregnant. And then if they are put on this medication, they need to be on oral contraception. Incidentally, if they finish this course or they're changed You still have to continue the oral contraception for about 2 years post-therapy This drug has a long half-life On its own, it's 10 to 18 days So if you've been taking it for a while You're getting some that's staying in the system So this is why you need to make sure your patient is very clear that they have to continue the oral contraception and not elect to become pregnant. If they are, then this is not the right medication for them. Mitoxantrone is for secondary progressive MS. Now the patient has gotten to the point that none of the other drugs are working. They're getting a worsening of symptoms. And mitoxantrone is an intercalating agent. It's another antineoplastic. It's known as an anthracycline, and it's doxorubicin-like. Doxorubicin is in the same family of mitoxanthrone. In the DNA, it's going to cause breaks. I tend to think of interculating agents. If I saw a DNA ladder in front of me, these drugs actually break the stairs of the ladder. So if you're breaking the stairs, you're not going to be able to replicate. And with this medication, it's also going to affect membrane fluidity. It's going to increase oxygen species, ROSs, not so much in our body, but in the cells that we're targeting. And ultimately, you're suppressing B and T cells. You're decreasing B cell function, and by doing that, you're not making antibodies. And that would be appropriate if we're thinking about this autoimmune disease. Some of the adverse effects are going to be cardiovascular, immunosuppression, we know, some nausea and vomiting, some loss of hair. This drug and the group are going to be used for AML, prostate, and breast cancer. So I have the ruby circles because if you ever look at a bottle of doxorubicin, it's red. The way we and my pharmacy colleagues remembered this is that whenever we saw doxorubicin, we know that this is one of the most cardiotoxic antineoplastics available. When you're on doxorubicin, you need to do tests for your heart before and after. mitoxantrone is probably not as high but since it's still in the class of interculating agents it is still recommended that you do some type of baseline cardiac function test the issue is that those ROSs that are targeting the cells that we want to kill can actually affect the contractile proteins in the heart and over time that can lead to something called dilated cardiomyopathy where the patient will present now with an increase in heart rate. They're going to have shortness of breath, almost like a presentation of CHF. So doing the EKG, doing frequent echocardiograms is going to be important. Cladribine or cladribine is a synthetic deoxyadenosine purine analog, but it's considered to be an anti-pyrimidine. So somewhat like what you saw with the terflunamide, okay? This one is used for hairy cell leukemia. It's part of the anti -metabolite class. It's S-phase specific. So S-phase means to me, and you'll see it later, it's the phase where you're getting DNA synthesis. So it makes sense by affecting pyrimidines or the other half affect purines like methotrexate. You're not synthesizing DNA and that's exactly what we would want in these B and T cells. It seems to be that cladribine has a greater effect on the B cells versus the T cells. It also allows for apoptosis of the lymphocytes. So what does that mean? that perhaps you're going to get lymphopenia, which means a lowering of your white blood cells, and you're going to be at a greater risk for infections. So again, looking at some of the titers of these viruses, whether it be varicella, looking at maybe hepatitis, making sure that the patient understands they need to stay on top of their vaccinations. okay it's you know towards you know the middle of flu season if these patients are being treated for ms they they should have had their vaccines in the fall they also need to be mindful where they're going if they're living you know in a house and they have like young children and children are prone to picking up infections they need to be mindful of that okay Okay, so in summary, not all of the drugs are here. Remember, L-M2-zumab is going to bind CD52. By binding CD52, you're going to allow for cell lysis, either by antibody -dependent cytotoxicity or complement -dependent cytotoxicity. Rituximab, aqualizumab, afatumumab, And then the newest one that can be given every six months, they're going to bind CD20. And by doing that, you're going to have an effect now that you're going to decrease your B cells. Dimethylfumarate makes monomethylfumarate. In the cell, inside the nucleus, you're going to get an increase in the production of glutathione, which helps neutralize the ROSs. Glutarimer, okay? Now you're increasing TH2, which tends to be anti-inflammatory. And then, of course, we have some of the other drugs we talked about, like interferon. Interferon is a cytokine itself. By activating the Janus kinase pathway and allowing for phosphorylation and activation of signal transduction, it's going to prevent the migration of those pathological lymphocytes in the CNS. It's going to stop them at the blood-brain barrier. So as I mentioned, one thing to know is that patients with MS are going to have other symptoms. One of them that I had observed many times in the pharmacy is the need for them to have adult diapers. It's kind of hard for patients to accept that, but it does happen. And there are ways that we can help with that adverse effect. So incontinence means basically an overactive bladder. The way we manage is by giving an M3 blocker. So remember, muscarinic. M3 is on the exocrine glands. So this is why when we give these medications, we're going to be prone to dryness, dry mouth, dry eyes, constipation. We're going to have urinary retention, which is actually the point of giving these in these patients. You want them to not urinate, okay? They can get medriasis, so if you have a patient with glaucoma, that can be a problem. There may be some selectivity issues, and I'll explain that in a moment, because oxybutynin is non-selective, and you'll probably have more issues with oxybutynin than the other two that I have highlighted in green, okay? Because even though these are beneficial, we need to be mindful of the adverse effects. The other thing about muscarinic blockers, and this is a very important point that I will highlight in some of the other coming lectures, is that through the Beers criteria, this is on the list of drugs that we want to avoid as much as possible in the elderly. Because if you're giving a muscarinic blocker, it's going to cross the blood-brain barrier. And what tends to happen is that these patients become more delusional. They have more cognition problems. Okay, so the idea here is that we want to give something that is less adverse effects. We want something that's going to be selective for the muscarinic receptors in the bladder. Because by doing that, they're not affecting the muscarinic receptors everywhere else. So there's a lower incidence of those adverse effects. And remember, hard as a hair, red as a beet, the heart runs alone, dry as a bone. That's how you should remember the adverse effects of muscarinic blockade. And where you are binding in the bladder, these M3 receptors, you want to decrease the tone of the detrusor muscle there. So tolterodyne and darafenacin are the newer drugs. these are going to be a lot less able to cause those muscarinic block effects than oxybutynin. However, there's still some reports of these toxicities happening. So you need to be mindful of that. The mechanism is GQ and I'll explain in a moment what that means. Another option is Botox. Now, Botox, we know, is used, you know, cosmetically for wrinkles because it relaxes muscle. So when you have wrinkles and you're injecting, the point is that you're relaxing the muscle there. So now the area is going to be more smooth. So that's, you know, the idea for using it as a cosmetic. But Botox will stop the release of acetylcholine needed for muscle contraction. So, thinking about what happens is that you need to get fusion of the postsynaptic membrane, basically, the presynaptic. You need to fuse it in order to get, like in other words, that spitting out of acetylcholine. And what makes that possible is SNARE proteins, specifically SNAP25. So, the idea here is if we cleave SNAP25, there's no fusion of the vesicles. So, no vesicle fusion, no spitting out of acetylcholine, and then acetylcholine finds calcium, and then you get contraction. So, Botox stops that from happening. Adverse effects is paralysis, okay? Okay, so understand that those people that used to have these Botox parties, the idea here is if you are injecting this on your own without the expertise of a healthcare professional, there's been people that can get really serious problems. In worst case scenario, you can actually get paralysis of your muscle. And the one I'm thinking about is a diaphragm. You can actually go into respiratory arrest. so it's really no joke when people are having parties like this they really should be finding somebody who has experience with it other uses of of botox is uh strabismus which is known as almost like a malalignment of the eye and almost like a cross eye that has been shown to be effective in those patients. Blepharospasm is rapid eye blinking. And migraines and cervical dystonia, it all has to do, again, with relaxing the muscles in the area, whether it be in the neck or also in some of, when we're thinking about migraines, some people can have problems with some of their muscles in the neck and head region as well. So muscarinic receptors are GQ-mediated. And I will say that throughout the year, every time I give a lecture, I do try to bring in a review point. So if I go over, that's the point. I'm trying to review as much as I can. So see it as a benefit for you. And that's why I do a question review after each one of my lectures to help you kind of digest the key concepts. But alpha-1, V1, and M3 are all GQ-mediated. When the drug binds, you're going to get an increase in protein lipase C, and you're going to increase IP3 and DAC. and now you're going to get now calcium released and by the action now of protein kinase C you're going to get contraction. So the one I love to talk about is the alpha-1 receptors because alpha -1 receptors are on the arterioles. So if you're giving an alpha-1 agonist like phenylephrine like you have a cold and you're trying to get your nose to run, that's a decongestion. We know that phenylephrine can raise blood pressure, and it raises blood pressure by this mechanism. If you're binding alpha-1 and you're increasing calcium in to the arterial, that's going to cause contraction. Contraction is going to change the blood flow, and that's going to lead to high blood pressure. As we go on through the semester and next year, Some of these concepts are going to become clearer, and you're not going to need to memorize as much. The other problem with MS is that the patients are going to have stiff muscles. The way we manage is by giving a muscle relaxer. One drug is known as tizanidine. This is an agonist of the alpha -2 receptor. If you remember, clonidine is an alpha-2 agonist, and in the presynaptic region, in the neurons, it actually decreases norepinephrine. And by doing that, clonidine is very effective at reducing blood pressure and heart rate. This drug is going to affect presynaptic release of excitatory neurotransmitters. It's going to decrease glutamate from spinal neurons. And that's going to help relieve some of that enhanced muscle tone. Because it's the excitatory transmitters that are really driving up the contraction of the muscle in these patients. Baclofen is a GABA-B agonist. It has a G -inhibitory mechanism. This is going to be, again, clear when I do opioids because opioids are also G -inhibitory. So ultimately, the drug will bind. You're going to get a decrease in adenyl cyclase, a decrease in cyclic AMP, a decrease in intracellular calcium, and a decrease in transmitters. What does this mean for the patients that have, say, this problem with muscle tone? Well, again, going back to decreasing the release of excitatory neurotransmitters in the presynaptic neurons. Those excitatory transmitters are responsible for the enhanced muscle tone in these patients. Baclofen sometimes can also be used in patients that have traumatic brain injury. They too will have enhanced muscle tone. Adverse effects of both of these medications, you have to be mindful that they can cause CNS depression. Especially if they're given with other medications. So for example, if you were using baclofen and you were using an opioid, the problem would be that you might have increased CNS depression, drowsiness, you might be impaired if you are in fact driving a vehicle. so again i'm not going to do this too in depth because you will have lectures but for depression we could give an ssri these are the gold standards for depression we have snrides propion which also block the nicotinic receptors and they can actually help patients who are trying to stop smoking. Tricyclic antidepressants, these are going to block the reuptake of serotonin and norepinephrine. SSRIs are specific for serotonin. One thing about the tricyclics is that they're not widely used anymore because they have their own adverse effects. They could be dangerous in an overdose. But one thing that they can do is that they block M3 receptors. So, for example, if you were depressed and you were taking amitriptyline, you would have some relief from your depression, but you would also have some relief from the incontinence. But again, some physicians may not elect to use tricyclics because, as I mentioned, they can be dangerous in an overdose, and I'll speak about it later. And then those people that have trouble staying awake, they would get a stimulant, an amphetamine, whether it be methylphenidate or modafinil. And then as mentioned, erectile dysfunction can be common. And erectile dysfunction drugs, basically what they're doing is blocking phosphodiesterase 5. By doing that, you're increasing cyclic GMP, and that would mean now you're getting relaxation of smooth muscle and improved blood flow to the area that you need it, and that would relieve the symptoms of ED, and that is how drugs like Viagra, which is sildenafil, work. The only issue is you have to be mindful. If this patient also has a cardiac issue like angina and they're given a nitrate or a vasodilator, this can actually potentiate guanyl cyclase and cyclic GMP. And that would mean that the patient is getting extreme smooth muscle relaxation. their blood pressure is going down so dramatically that the only way the body responds is by baroreceptor reflex mechanisms you're going to raise sympathetics and some people can actually get an mi and that's what was happening early on when viagra was put to market they didn't know they were not warned of that medication adverse effect and some people actually did die of an mi So it's important to make sure that we don't give nitrates with the drugs for ED, the phosphodiesterase 5 inhibitors. And then over time, patients who have MS may have trouble walking. Unfortunately, some of them may end up in using a wheelchair or sometimes in severe cases, they're bedridden. So we have a drug here, difamperdine, that blocks potassium channels. So what does this mean? Well, in patients that have demyelination, the action potential duration is decreased because of an increase in potassium channel opening. so what happens is that you as you can see here if there's more channels open the potassium will leak out and that has been shown to have an effect on the motor neurons especially the action potentials over there in that area so the drug actually comes in and blocks the potassium channels so you're not getting leakage okay and you're also by doing that increasing the action potential nerve conduction and if you can increase the action potential in the nerves that helps with motor activity such as walking okay so that is one interesting medication so I will say that since this is the first lecture you have with me I would advise you to go through the question review it usually does take another 20 minutes but most students in the past and I've been doing this for a while have really found that that extra 25 minutes does help kind of cement the concepts and it also makes you see the question in a u-world format so it makes you practice for your board exam so i would advise you do that with summary i would say is to understand that this is a disease of demyelination most of the therapies will be immunological okay and the target is to somewhat decrease pathological lymphocytes t-cells b -cells and then also some of the drugs that we use to manage the symptoms whether it be for incontinence with m3 blockers or botox or as mentioned for patients that have depression or erectile dysfunction, okay? There will be a full lecture on antidepressants as we go through the semester, but this is just somewhat of an introduction. Thank you for your attention, everyone. Please direct any questions to me, and I'll see you soon.