Hello, everybody. My name is Dr. Richard Morgan, and once again, I'm here for the third installment of three neurologic DPR lectures. This one is entitled Sensory Systems, Special Techniques, as well as more documentation. We're going to kind of sum up and complete the third, like I said, and final installment of the neurologic lecture series. Once again, the session objectives will be to learn how to perform a neurologic assessment of the sensory system, as well as the use of the various special techniques that we will be demonstrating. Next, we'll learn how to obtain a detailed health history in a patient with a neurologic complaint. And finally, we will once again review documentation of the physical findings for a neurologic exam and include the sensory system as well. Again, here's just more of a recap from the first two lectures of all the components as we go down the list, including, and we've already covered mental status, cranial nerves, motor, gait coordination, as well as reflexes. Now we're going to move on to the remainder of the physical exam, including sensation and other special techniques. Again, sensory pathways are very complex. You'll be reviewing them in your neuroanatomy. It's more or less something more for documentation here and for references. But just note that they do participate in reflex activity, those sensory impulses, including conscious sensation, local body position and space, helping to regulate the internal autonomic functions as well as heart rate, respiration, and blood pressure. And these are all things that we're going to be practicing over and over in the lab. I just want you to see the clinical correlation between the neuroanatomy and physiology and how we're going to be performing these things in labs. What does sensation include? Well, there's a number of terms that we use to notify sensation, Starting with analgesia, which is the absence of pain. You don't feel it. Hypalgesia, who is decreased sensitivity to pain. Hyperalgesia, it can be increased pain sensitivity, also known in some cases as a severe form, something called allodynia, which is increased pain to light sensation. And that's often seen in something called reflex sympathetic dystrophy or chronic regional pain syndrome, which will go over in your neural lectures. Anesthesia is the complete absence of touch sensation. Hyposthesia is decreased sensitivity to touch. Hyperesthesia is increased sensitivity to touch. And then finally, paresthesias are a sensation of like a numbness or tingling or pins and needles that often can be felt when nerves are being compromised or compressed. What are we testing when we look at the sensory system? There's a number of components, including the following. Number one, pain and temperature. Now, that involves the spinal thalamic tracts, position sense, appropriate reception, as well as vibration, which involves the dorsal and posterior columns, and then light touch, spinal thalamic and posterior columns, and then finally, two-point or discriminative sensations, which depend on some of the sensations listed above, as well as also processed by the sensory cortex. how do we sense how do we test for the sensory well we're going to go through all these one by one the most important general rules as with most things that we do when we do our physical exam is we always compare both sides we want to make sure it's symmetrical and we go left to right immediately want to check the exact region or location on one side to the other to get that immediate correlation to determine whether or not there is a reduced sensation or diminished sensation on one of the two sides. Next, we always want to compare proximal versus distal. The shoulder, which is proximal, and then the wrist and hand, which is more distal. Testing these components can often lead to a possible location of where the lesions are occurring, and that includes pain, temperature, and touch. Next is vibration and position sense, We test fingers and toes distantly first, and we'll go through those tests as well, as well as vary the pace of the testing. Next, we want to map out the boundaries of sensory loss or hypersensitivity. Every location of sensory will coincide with a specific region. It could be regionally the axial spine based on the lumbar sacral region where it's coming from, or it could be dermatoma, meaning a specific location along the skin. And I'll show you some pictures of that as well. Dermatomes and peripheral nerve patterns. Okay, here's some more terminology, again, that you'll cover in neuro and neuroanatomy as well. But dermatomes are a band of skin innervated by the sensory root of a single spine nerve. Each spinal nerve, as it exits, innervates a specific area of skin, and they're often correlated with that nerve. So once you are able to determine a decreased sensory component in a specific area, you can often correlate it back to that nerve root. Next is peripheral nerve patterns, which can indicate areas innervated by a specific nerve. And then, of course, knowledge of the dermatomes and peripheral nerve patterns help to localize the neurologic lesion to a specific level of the spinal cord or nerve that is affected. This is really where anatomy and clinical correlation comes together. So understanding your anatomy, knowing over and over again when you start to practice where the loss or location of sensation may be decreased and how it correlates with either a nerve root or a nerve pattern will often go towards really having a best way to understand how to treat these patients. Here's an example of some diagrams of what dermatomes look like. The left side is broken down dermatomes by skin region, as you can see. You'll be given these throughout the course of your neurologic neuroanatomy training. So become familiar with them. Prifinal nerve patterns. And remember, some are more common than others, okay? It's really important. For instance, if you find there's a band or distribution along, you know, the lateral aspect of your left leg, right? then you have an idea as to that it's possibly coming from L4, L5, L2, L3, L4. You'll get an idea what nerve root is involved and potentially what peripheral nerve patterns are involved. So there's going to be ones that are more common than others, especially cervical and lumbar sacral. So really be comfortable with those patterns and know that when there's a deficit or when there's a loss of sensation, what is the clinical correlation? Again, sensory testing will involve the following. We can test for pain, hot and cold temperature, light touch vibration, as well as proprioception and discriminative sensations. Sensory testing of dermatomes is done, obviously, bilaterally, as I said. And what we're going to be doing is going to be touching multiple areas of the body with a sharp or semi-sharp object. Oftentimes we use a cotton tool tip applicator. The light touch, usually we use the tip, which is the cotton tip, and then the semi -sharp or sharp end, we either use the end of the wooden stick, as you can see in the picture, or sometimes if you really are having a difficult time, you can break the stick in half and lightly use the semi -sharp end, the sharpened end of the tip. Those are how we're going to be doing them, and they should be done with the patient's eyes closed and always go side to side along the same dermatomal path. So if you're doing, like in this picture, you're doing a light touch and sharpness to the left forearm, then you should go right and do it to the right side as well. Now sensory testing using vibration. Here's where we take our tuning fork. we usually use the 128 hertz which is the larger ones in your kit we place that tuning fork over the distal ip joint which is either the finger or the toe you have it vibrate and then you hold the patient hold their finger out and ask them if they can feel this and you again have them close their eyes see if they can feel it and have them give the local any vibration that's impaired it's going to be more proximal bone of if vibration is impaired test the more proximal bony prominence, such as the wrist, elbow, medium allele, shin, and so on and so forth. You want to move your way up. Usually, if there's any kind of vibration deficit, it'll be more distal, and then you should work your way more proximal as you go along to see where the impaired component, the location, the region is. Often the first sensation, as I said, loss in peripheral neuropathy is distal. So, you know, when you're going to go into this, when you cover diabetes and your neurology and neuronatic elections, peripheral neuropathies are most commonly distal. So if a patient has a history of long -term diabetes or they have that sensation of pins and needles occasionally in their fingers or toes and it's been getting worse, this is definitely something that you want to check and to determine not only whether or not vibration is present or exactly where the location is as well. Next, we're going to do proprioception, which is joint position sense. Again, very important, a little tricky to do if it's got to be done correctly. So, joint position sense, test the fingers and toes first. So, what you do, if the distal joints are normal, most likely proprioception is intact and proximal joints. So, what you do, as you can see in this picture on the lower left, as the examiner, you're standing in front of the patient, have them close their eyes. You're gently placing your fingers between two of the proximal interphalangeal joints and very gently, almost very, very subtle, you're going to slightly flex or extend the patient's finger. You have them ask them if it feels like it's moving up or down. You can move it literally a millimeter. And if you do it on yourself or do it with a family member, you'll see it's very easy if you have normal proprioception to know even the slightest movement to be able to tell. But a lot of times, people with peripheral neuropathies and other vascular diseases in their distal extremities oftentimes have a very difficult time determining proprioception. So it's got to be done subtly. It's got to be done very, very, very carefully to pay attention to which side is or is not being affected. Now, discriminative sensations. This tests the ability of the sensory cortex to correlate, analyze, or interpret sensations. Touch and position sense need to be intact for tests. All right. Absence or decrease in discriminative sensation includes a lesion, possibly most likely in the sensory cortex. And once again, patient's eyes should be closed for all of these discriminative tests. We need to have touch and position sense intact. Otherwise, they won't be able to perform these tests accurately and you won't be able to get accurate results. What are some of the discriminative tests? OK, these are tests. There are three most commonly that we use here. Stereognosis is the identifying of an object in touch. So you take a very common option, be a pen or a pen cap or a key, as in this picture here. You have the patient close their eyes, place the object in their hand, and simply ask them if they can feel it and what they think the object is. And then usually most of you will be able to determine that. But again, people who have lacked position sense and things like that can have an often difficult time telling what the object is. Second, grapesthesia is number identification, where you can identify the number drawn on a patient's palm. In the picture, we use a pen so that it illustrates what you're doing. You can simply use a cotton tip applicator or a sharp end of a pen cap that's not on and just draw the number without drawing. We don't want people drawing all over people's hands in labs, so you don't need to specifically draw the number, but just for illustrative purposes, that's what we're doing here. And then next is two -point discrimination. Taking a paperclip and touching two places simultaneously using the open ends will help determine if the patient can feel one or both points. Normal minimal distance for discrimination here will vary for different parts of the body. You know, when there's more nerve endings, you can often tell a very, very close distance between the paperclips. So, but people with significant diminished sensation and discrimination will have a very hard time determining those points. So you start as close as you can. If they can't tell, they move it a millimeter or two further apart and ask the patient if they feel one, two, or ask them what they feel. And if they say they feel it, ask them how many points they feel. And normal, obviously, is two points. Here's some more discriminative sensation testing. This one's point localization. Again, it's intuitive and simplistic in its way. It's performed with the patient's eyes closed. You briefly touch any place on their skin. Upper body, lower body, arms, whatever, you know, you want to test on something that's easily accessible and then ask the patient to open their eyes and point to the place that's touched. So you briefly touch it, you remove the object and ask him to literally demonstrate where you had just touched. And if there's a patient with a lesion in the sensory cortex, their ability to localize that point will be significantly impaired. And then next is extinction. So, again, with the patient's eyes closed, we simultaneously stimulate areas on both sides of the body, generally the same point, such as the biceps or the upper arms in this picture. The patient will identify the location of the stimulus. With the sensory cortex lesions, only one stimulus may be felt, and this stimulus that is not recognized is extinguished. And it would be on the contralateral side that is being affected. So it's one way you can tell if there's an impairment of the sensory cortex due to the contralateral sensory loss. Here are some techniques that we often include towards the end of the neurologic lecture. We'll go through each one of these individually. Brudinsky and Koenig signs are both tests for meningitis. Then we have some tests for cervical radiculopathy or herniated discs in the neck, including axial compression and pyramidal distraction, as well as the Spurling test, by the way. It's skipped down a spot. And then we'll go into a few other tests with using the legs and looking for lumbar radiculopathy and possibly a malignering patient in the UBER test. All right, meningeal signs, important. This is a condition that you definitely want to identify early, since untreated, this can cause significant morbidity mortality. Meningitis is an extremely important diagnosis to make early on, especially if there's signs of fever, neck stiffness, and mental status changes. This test is suspected when meningeal inflammation from either meningitis or subarachnoid hemorrhage can be present, and the two most common tests that we will be practicing in lab are Brudzinski and Kernan. What do these signs do? Brudzinski. When you lie the patient supine and you slightly flex the head and neck forward, as you have this patient licepine flat, and when you lift the head and neck forward, flexion, there would be, if the Brudzinski sign is present, there'd be a natural response for the hip and knee, or I should say pathological response for the hip and knee, relax will now be flexed automatically as you flex the neck. There'll be a simultaneous flexion of both hips and knees. Very important to recognize this. Due to a constant inflammation along throughout the entire spinal cord, any sort of problem or irritation of the cervical spine will cause a subsequent inflammation or response to the lower extremity. And that's why we get this response. The second test is Kerning's. This is done on the leg this time, where you have the patient's leg flex at the hip and knee while the patient's lying supine. The physician takes the leg and flexes it as it is shown in this picture. Once the leg is flexed at the knee and the ankle, you slowly extend the leg and straighten the knee. A positive Kerning's sign would be pain and increase resistance to knee extension as you bring the leg back down. How can we remember what these tests are? Very easy. I like to remember B for Brutzynski is brain, therefore it's the neck, and K for Koenig is the knee. So K Koenig is done at the lower extremity, B Brutzynski is done at the upper extremity. And once again, we'll be practicing these important tests in lab. Axial compression test. This is a test for cervical neck impingement. With the patient seated just as such in the picture and the physician standing behind, you rest the elbows on the shoulders and gently place a downward compression with your hands resting on top of the patient's head. You exert a downward force firmly, but not causing an increased amount of pain, all right? The test is positive if pain or neurologic symptoms are reproduced in the cervical spine and or upper extremity. As soon as the patient reports any discomfort, the test should be completed, and it should be deemed a positive test, okay? So this is how the axial compression test is done. Straightforward, the patient is looking ahead. There's no side bending or rotation, and it's a simple straight downward force. Framal distraction, okay? This is a test for cervical nerve impingement. So with the patient seated on the table, the examiner places one hand under the patient's shin as seen here, with the other hand under the occiput, the back of the head. Gently, an upward traction force applied on the cervical spine. Now, normally, if the patient is experiencing symptoms of cervical impingement, which could be pain at the neck, shooting pain down the arms or the shoulders, oftentimes a positive test here is a reduction of pain due to the traction force. It would actually make the patient feel better. So once again, the test is positive. The pain or neurologic symptoms of the cervical spine and or upper extremity are reduced with the traction force. In other words, it's almost like a treatment technique that we help to relieve the pressure on the spine, and a positive test would actually be a reduction in pain. Squirling test, something also very commonly done. It's been around for years, all right, but it's an important test to recognize. This is a test for cervical nerve root compression. It's simple. It's similar to the axial pyramidal compression test with a slight rotatory component. So as you can see with the physician standing behind the patient, having the patient look over their shoulder and then up at the ceiling. So you're applying sort of like an extension and a rotation, rotatory force. That's when the downward compression as seen by the red arrow pointing down is applied to the patient's head. Okay. Very, very important. And we were going to review this in lab, and the scholars are going to be reviewing this as well. The maneuver reproduces the neck pain with radiation to the arm on the same side that the head is turned to. If there is pain simply with the positioning in the head or just moving it into rotation or extension, it is not necessary to apply downward pressure. It's considered a positive test. Ultimately, we're trying to protect the sanctity and well-being of the patient. And a positive test, just by putting it in a position, it's not going to create any less pain. It's going to create more discomfort. So we would consider that a positive test. So slightly different than the axial pyramidal compression is the Spurling with the extension and rotatory component, which really isolates the side of the nerve root compression. Next, we have the straight leg raise with Braggart's test. This is a test for radicular sciatic nerve pain. As you can see, the patient is lying supine with their legs straight and extended. What we do here is we test the unaffected side first. So the first thing you do is always ask the patient, do you have any pain? If they say they have back pain, let's say on the right leg, let's say in this case for the left leg, we're going to examine the right side first. Always examine the unaffected side first. Then we raise the patient's relaxed leg. We raise the patient's leg in a relaxed manner and straighten by the angle. Then we place some panellinia prevented from bending. We want literally a straight extension component as we flex the whole leg upward. We stop when the patient feels pain or the maximal flexion's been achieved, usually around 60 to 120 degrees, sometimes a little less due to poor flexibility of some people. And we repeat that on the affected side. The Braggart test component is where we lower the leg to a point just below the level of the pain. So the patient reports pain, let's say, at 60 degrees out. Then we go another 20 to 30 degrees less, so we move it down, and then once we lower the leg to the point just below to the level of pain, we add a dorsiflexion component to the foot on the affected side. This will undoubtedly cause an L5 portion of the sciatic nerve will be stretched and cause pain that radiates below the knee. So it's an important thing to add because it isolates the specific sciatic component on that side. So we know if the pain is coming from the leg or from the back or where it's coming from location-wise. So remember to do these two tests on a practical assessment. You will be likely to, if you're asked to do a straight leg raise, it will be likely to be done with the Braggart's component as well. Next, we have the well-opposite straight leg raise, or cross-straight leg raise, as it's called. And this test helps to differentiate between the sciatic nerve irritation and a possible herniated discus-based occupying lesion. This is where the patient, as you can see, is lying supine with the legs extended outward. Then the examiner has the patient raise their fully extended leg on the uninvolved side. So in this case, the patient's likely has, let's say, right-sided back pain or leg pain, and then we have them raise the unaffected side. So in this case, as he raises the leg, the test will indicate a possible space-occupying lesion if the pain occurs on the opposite side of the leg that was raised, which, as we said before, since we're raised in the unaffected side, it goes intuitively to say that the pain will be on the affected side. So, again, an important test where we're looking for some sort of space or fine lesion or possible sciatic nerve irritation, and this helps differentiate the two. Next, we have the Hoover test. I love this test. I think it's an important test. It's a test that helps determine whether a patient's malignant or end up. You know, a lot of patients, for many reasons, they might want to get off work. They might be drug-seeking medications. So it's important sometimes to identify whether or not the patient's be lingering if your suspicions are, you know, valid. So one of the tests is the Hoover test. So with the patient laying supine and you standing at the feet, it's a unilateral exam. So the examiner paces their hand under the patient's calcaneus, under their heel, under their heels bilaterally, okay, under the heel, as you can see in this picture. What you do is you instruct the patient to raise the leg of the involved side without bending their knee. So they're literally doing a straight upward leg raise. So in this case, let's say the patient is experiencing a left-sided back pain. In this case, you're going to ask the patient to raise their left leg above your hand, that you're cupping the hand on the left leg. So as you're monitoring that, the examiner is monitoring for downward pressure of the heel on the side not being tested. Okay, normally, in every normal patient, you can try this at home, we're going to practice this in the lab. When you naturally lift, you have a patient lift the affected side on the left here, there's going to be a natural downward pressure against the left hand on the right leg. Okay, so that's natural. The test is positive if there's an absence of downward pressure of the uninvolved foot when the patient's raising the involved leg, okay? I'll repeat that one more time. The test is positive if there is an absence of a downward pressure of the uninvolved foot when the patient is raising the involved leg. So hopefully this gives you better insight as to understand why this works. Naturally, we would be lowering the leg with the right leg when the left leg is raised. But if they're malingering, this likely wouldn't happen. Of course, you want to combine it with all your other suspicions and findings on the test. But this is a really good example of how to help determine whether or not a patient could be malignant. Again, here's finally, let's go over the neurologic exam. Again, we start with the patient history. This is more of a recap. Why do we go to the neurologic exam? When do we incorporate the neurologic exam? If any or all these symptoms are presented, patient reports coming to you with any of the following symptoms, again, not an exhaustive list, but really common things that people come to their primary care doctors or neurologists. Headache, dizziness, weakness, numbness or abnormal sensation, syncope or near syncope, a history of recent seizure, or possible tremor or involuntary movements. Again, there are other things that can be available, possible, bowel, bladder, incontinence, things like that. But bottom line is we want to give you a general idea as to when you kind of combine these components and when you do a detailed neurologic exam. Common neurologic complaints. So here's an example of common neurologic complaints such as a headache. So we broke it down for you. Patient reports of a headache. How do you proceed? So again, OPQRST, onset, remember there's three P's, provocative, palliative, progressive. There's two Q's, quality of life and quality of the pain, radiation, severity, timing, and associated symptoms. So you go through your normal OPQRSTA, location, duration, and then other commonly associated symptoms that are associated with headaches. And go through some of these. Associated symptoms are things that are directly correlated that we'd be concerned with if the patient presented with the headache, such as visual changes of double vision, sensitivity to light or sound, weakness, loss of sensation. Maybe they have something like what we call amorosis fugax, which is where a shade's being pulled over one eye. Anything like that that you'd want to ask about regarding neurological complaints associated with a headache that would be concerning that would require a more intense workout. Okay. Take a thorough past history, including, of course, medications, including what they take for headaches, lifestyle changes. Are they high on coffee, nicotine, alcohol, and stress, which can also increase headaches? Do they have a history of migraines? A lot of times young men or women have history of migraines as a child, and that's something you definitely want to document and keep in mind as you do your physical exam and your history. Here's the common neurological complaints for dizziness and vertigo. Again, OPQRSTA, as we said, knowing the age and onset and duration. Again, associated symptoms. What are some associated symptoms that currently occur with dizziness and vertigo? Sensation that the room is spinning. Do they feel it when they go from sit to stand or transfer? Is it associated with nausea, vomiting, or even fever? Do they have a ringing in the ear? Do they have a recent fever? Any double vision or problems with balance or gait? Have they fallen? It's really important to help determine a history of falls because then it gets into more concerning issues such as based on the age of the patient, potential risk factors at home, history of falls can lead to hip fractures and so on and so forth. So it's really important to get a detailed, thorough history, of course, including medications, because a lot of medications as well as cross medications can lead to side effects such as dizziness and vertigo. So getting a detailed medication history is just as important. Next, we have common neurologic complaints, including weakness. Again, this can be muscle weakness, which is very common, especially if it's associated with a TIA, a trans -esteem sickness attack, or a ******, a cerebrovascular accident. Knowing where the weakness is, is it unilateral or bilateral? Is it localized to the upper or lower legs? Is it localized to the face? Is there a drooliness of their mouth or a weakness in their eyes or facial muscles? Is it unilateral or bilateral? Look for patterns of weakness. Notice where the patient says they feel weak and then places they may not have realized, right? Proximal versus distal muscles are huge. Why is this important? Because if there's a history of potential ******, localizing where the weakness occurs, whether it be face, proximal, distal muscles, will help us determine the actual location within the circle of Willis or somewhere in the brain where the ****** occurs. So we'll know where to look for the MRI, or CAT scan for that matter. Associated symptoms with weakness can include fatigue, apathy, drowsiness, loss of strength, mental status changes, slurred speech, as well as aphasia. So taking a thorough history as well as a social history, such as diet and exercise and history of smoking, which all have significant risk factors associated with weakness relating to TIAs, CVAs, and heart issues as well. Next, we have common neurological complaints with numbness, abnormal, or absence of sensation. So here we want to ask not just the OBQRST, but what's the quality of the numbness? Is it tingling like pins and needles? Are there times when you don't feel it at all? Is it worse when you lean on a particular arm? Is there reduced or completely absence sensation or anesthesia. A lot of times, a common thing that a lot of people experience, and I'm sure many of you have, is an ulnar neuropathy at the elbow. A lot of times, people, the way they sleep, they sometimes wake up in the middle of the night with an absence of sensation to the one and a half digits of the pinky and the ring finger. So a lot of times, you can feel that. And oftentimes, that's just due to an ulnar entrapment neuropathy that occurs overnight. Once you reposition yourself, it goes away. But it's a simple example of something that a lot of people tend to feel. Is it associated with burning or irritating sensations? What's the pattern of the paresthesias? Is it a stocking glove distribution, which is common with peripheral neuropathy as a diabetics? Germatomal distribution, which can be associated with potentially cervical or lumbar irritated nerve root or patchy areas of sensory loss. So really taking a thorough history and breaking down the components as to exactly where the abnormal sensation is occurring. And of course, you'll determine in your physical exam, but getting a really good picture is an idea to get to the right diagnosis. Next, we have syncope or neurosyncope. All right, the sense of feeling that you're going to pass out or actually passing out. Always ask the patient, was there a loss of consciousness? Did anything happen just priorly? What was the prodromal phase like? What happened right before? Did you experience any pain? Any loss of vision? Any weird sounds or external noises? Were you lightheaded or dizzy? Did you have any chest pain? Did you have fever? You know, any kind of any taking a detailed history of present illness or HPI here is vital to understanding the possible causes of why they passed out or why they feel alone, why they lost consciousness. again how long did they lose consciousness for was there a complete loss what were you doing at the time of onset one of my favorite questions to ask standing were you standing sitting or lying down why is that important well it's important because if they were standing and they fell there could be other subsequent sequelae such as you know possible fractures bruise bones muscles strains things like that and also it puts them at risk especially for further episodes of syncope if they're not safe. Are there any other triggers or warning symptoms? How long did it last? And how quickly did the onset occur? Was there anyone at home or where, if it was at work, would anyone else witness it? And any other associated symptoms, as I said before? Any of these things, a detailed HPI will always give you an extremely good insight as to what the cause of the signal episode may or may not be. Next, we have common neurological complaints of seizures. If a patient presents with a recent history of seizure, how do we present? How did it onset? Was it once or multiple times? Many times I've had patients come in, they usually had a history of seizures. It might've been months or years before the last one, but it's important to identify if they have a history of them. Did they lose consciousness? Was it one-sided or bilateral? What parts of the body were affected? How old was the patient? Very important. Ask them about history of head trauma. Were they in a motor vehicle accident recently or years ago? Did they ever fall on their head? Any of these things can really lead to an important understanding as to whether or not this could be something that's due to a traumatic episode or something even more important, a pathological issue going on within the brain itself, such as tumors or something along those lines of mass undefined nature. Associated symptoms, always, always, always ask about the bladder, bowel, incontinence, drowsiness or impaired memory after the event, which is common, and tongue biting. We need to always protect the airway, make sure that they're safe and they're able, that they didn't have an episode of vomiting. Did they eat recently? You've got to be worried about aspiration, right? And then we asked about fevers as well, as well as the rest of their medical history. Any history, as I said, head trauma, ******, diabetes, meningitis, and so on and so forth. And the medical history, social history about drug and alcohol use is important too. So some or all these can also cause episodes of seizure. ******* overdose, as well as benzo withdrawals, can actually lead to induced seizures. So keep those things in mind. And that's why the social history is so vital in these cases that present. Next, we have common neurological complaints of tremors and involuntary movements. So once we complete our OPQRST, some of the things we ask about, right? Facial dyskinesias or tics. Do the patient have any history of any snake-like movement in their arms or abnormal kind of wavy -like motions of their arms or legs? Where do they occur if they do? What area of the body? Is it arms, legs, or in the face? Is there a facial tape? Does it occur at rest? Does it occur at certain times of the day? Does it occur with increased stress? Asking them all these questions. Is it repetitive and coordinated? Does it increase or decrease in voluntary movement? Okay. What type of movement triggers the involuntary movements? All right. So getting a detailed medical social history, especially neurologic exam, things like Huntington's, Parkinson's disease, and other sort of neurologic pathologies need to be asked about. And medications, of course, because medications can actually cause some or all these symptoms. And asking about family members to a detailed family history is really vital in these cases, especially if they're presenting with this. here's some examples of tic and involuntary movements the one on the left here shows an oral facial dyskinesias um with the tongue movements um on the right side we see tics where there's a kind of like a stereotype coordinated movement involving at irregular intervals including repetitive winking or grimacing or shoulder shrugging that can occur And then dystonias we see here cause irregular movements resembling apoptosis or a tremor. And then down below here, we have examples of an apoptoid movement with the hands, which are more twisting and writhing, like a chorea form movement that's associated with Huntington's. And then finally, a chorea movement on the bottom right here. These are what we call brief, rapid, jerky, irregular, and unpredictable. They can occur at rest or interrupt normal four -day movements, and they occur out of the blue. Patients have no control over them, but they can be very unsightly and very uncomfortable and really affect the patient's ability to live a regular life that they need to be looked into. Finally, let's look at some preventable numbers. ****** is an important diagnosis. It's something you don't want to miss. patients who present with weakness, aphasias, or an episode of what's possibly a CVA or cerebrovascular accident, any risk factors for strokes can always be broken up into, and this goes with heart disease as well, as modifiable versus non-modifiable risk factors. There's a lot of things patients can do, or things that they do do, I should say, that increase their risk for ******. And those things that are modifiable are things that we can change and have a positive effect on. High blood pressure for one, hypertension, taking medications and living a healthy lifestyle can lower that. Diabetes is also a risk factor. So managing, controlling blood sugars, monitoring A1Cs are important as well. History of smoking. Smoking is directly and inherently correlated to an increased risk for ******. So we really want to get an insight as to the patient's history or smoking history, and then make a determination and how we want to best proceed. Dyslipidemia or high lipids and cholesterol are always shown to improve or can definitely increase the risk for ischemic strokes, so that's something we need to do when we get to evaluate the blood panel. And sedentary lifestyle. Sedentary lifestyle leads to many or all the things just listed above it. It certainly doesn't help. Maintaining an active life is maintaining a healthy life. Next, we have a screening for diabetic peripheral neuropathy. I think it's important to kind of just give an overview. Again, this is one of the more common presenting complaints to a clinic, maybe family medicine, certainly in a neurology clinic. Especially early on, diabetic patients are very unaware of their neuropathy. They may not even realize they have it because there's a lost sensation, often distally, where they don't feel what's going on. And they're also unaware of their sensory loss as well. And as it says here, distal symmetric polyneuropathy is the most common neuropathy for these patients. It happens both sides, like I said before, in a stocking blood distribution, the sensory loss. But the problem really lies with loss of sensation, let's say, in the feet. They can step on a thumbtack or a nail or a splinter. And if they're not examining their feet regularly, that can lead to significant infection, possible vascular damage, and even loss of limb. And it can happen fairly quickly, within less than a year. So it's really important to really educate these patients on understanding how they can combat any NPV and practice preventative medicine and helping to maintain a healthy life as possible. They're a risk factor for ulceration, arthropathy, and amputations. Prevalence can be 20% long-term type 1 diabetics and 50% in type 2, probably more because there's many more type 2s than type 1s. But important to maintain tight glycemic control, routine foot exams, assessing for neuropathies, as stated here, plantar, light touch sensation, skin breakdown. And it doesn't say it here, but make sure you always get at least once a year an ophthalmologic exam. Go visit the ophthalmologist because there's a lot of diseases that can also affect possible diabetes and lead to blindness, especially sore control buildup in the thomac arteries. But it really is important because diabetes can be associated with significant ocular pathologies as well. Finally, here is an example, as I've shown you in the past, of a normal neurologic exam. I won't go through the whole thing, but this is more for your references. You can see here everything is listed as it was in the previous slides, in the previous two lectures, all the way down to deep tendon reflexes here. Moving on to the next slide, we have documentation of normal cranial nerve exam. Again, just to reiterate, if the higher exam is normal, you won't have to write this all out every time. Obviously, if you're doing a detailed or a logical exam for one of the presenting complaints that I mentioned earlier, you certainly want to do it. But essentially what you're doing here and on the next slide, cranial nerves 2 through 12 can be done. The exam can be done in just two to three minutes. And then if everything's normal or checks out, you can simply write cranial nerves 2 through 12 grossly intact bilaterally, except for cranial nerve 5 on the left, cranial nerve 7 on the left, something like that. You can really simplify your writing. Summary. It's important to take a good history when evaluating anyone with a neurologic problem. Neurologic diagnosis can be obtained through performing a thorough exam that includes testing of the motor and sensory systems, coordination, gait, and reflexes, in addition to the cranial nerves. It's important to know how to document these. And again, there were examples of documentation, not only in this particular slide, but it'll be on your skill sheets as well. So when you're reviewing everything for the labs upcoming, please make sure you review those skill sheets. There's examples of proper documentation of each system on the particular skill sheets you're reading. There's a list of your references or your records. So you have that as well, as well as this, dates, and textbook. Again, preparation for this final neuro lab. As always, be dressed in DPR attire and bring your ophthalmoscope. If we have time, we will try to get through and practice more of the total neuro exam if we have time towards the end. And of course, please, please, please review those neurologic DPR skill sheets prior to coming to lab. Sometimes the labs are dense, as I've said before, and it can be very, very difficult with everything we need to do and get through to get through every single skill. But we will definitely cover as many as possible. But your ability to review these skills prior to lab is vital to understanding and also won't take unnecessary time away from your practice time as well. And that's it. I thank you for your time. I hope you have a great rest of your day. As always, you may ask me any questions regarding this in lab down the line. The first slide has my email. It's been a pleasure lecturing all of you and I look forward to seeing you all in lab. So thank you very much. Thank you.