Hello, folks. Welcome to the neuroanatomy lecture on cerebrovascular anatomy, where we will cover gross blood supply of the CNS, the brain and the spinal cord. My name is Vinci Matthew. I am one of your academic medicine scholars on the research track. Some of you guys might remember me from OMM and DPR last semester. And I want to thank Dr. Jennifer G, who is at the Arkansas campus, for giving me this opportunity to give this lecture. I'm very excited to give this lecture because I love neuroanatomy and neuro in general. Hopefully I can use some of my passion into this lecture and get you guys excited about it too. I know some of you guys are intimidated by neuroanatomy, rightfully so, but I want to try and make it easier for you guys to understand this maybe a little humongous topic that cerebrovascular anatomy is. And I've tried to do that by bringing in the clinical aspects of what you guys will see in third year, fourth year, and if you go into neuro in the future. So I've tried to make everything as clinical and as board relevant as possible, but there are some things in anatomy that you just have to wrote, memorize, that you can later on apply it. So if you have any questions regarding any of the topics covered in this lecture, please feel free to email me here. I'm always available to Zoom or answer your emails on it. I've tried to include some clinical questions and my exam questions will be similar to that. So trying to make it more clinical as I can be. Here are my references. I want you guys to focus on the NOLTEs, The Human Brain and the First Aid USMLE Step 1, 2024. The NOLTEs is the primary textbook for neuroanatomy and it's available on the library database and also multiple copies in the med school library. For the first aid book, I have actually included a picture of this book on the corners of some of the slides. Those are important board -tested topics. So I've tried to highlight it and they will be coming over and over again as you guys start studying for the boards. So this is a kind of time where you guys can start looking into first aid, kind of get familiar with the board stuff. It's never too early to start. Here are your session objectives. So by the end of the lecture, you guys should be comfortable naming these arteries, identifying these arteries on the brain in the picture, in a cadaver picture, or an animated cartoon picture. So we'll go through all of these in detail. And for each of these arteries, when we talk about it, try to see, can you identify the parent vessels? Where does this artery come from? So if you're talking about common carotid artery, where does the common carotid artery originate from? On the right and the left. Where is it going? Is the common carotid going to a specific region in the brain, or is it giving a branch that goes further into? And what are the neurovascular structures that are related to it? So we'll talk about the common carotid artery in the neck and the venous structure, internal jugular vein, the nervous structure, the vagus nerve associated with it, and what part of the brain does it supply to? So each of these arteries, don't just think of them isolated, try to think of them relative to the other structures and its functions. Where is it coming from? Where is it going to? What is it feeding? This is an important picture that you guys want to have an understanding of by the end of this lecture. If you guys understand this portion, then I have done my job. And as you can see I've put a picture of the first aid and that is indicating that this is a heavily tested topic on the step one and for that matter step two as well. So by the end of the lecture you guys should be able to identify the anterior circulation versus the posterior circulation. What are the arteries of those circulation? What part of the brain are they feeding? So there are four ways blood can enter your brain. So the anterior circulation provided by the two internal carotid arteries gives about 80% of the blood supply. And the posterior circulation given by your vertebral arteries, two vertebral arteries, that provides about 20% of the supply. So you have your angiogram picture here. In the green, you can see the two internal carotid arteries coming off of the common carotid that splits into internal and external carotid. And then you have the two arteries in the red, which is your vertebral arteries, coming off of your subclavian arteries. The internal carotid provides the telencephalon, the diencephalon, and the vertebral arteries provides the diencephalon and the brainstem, which is the midbrain, pons, the medulla, and the cerebellum. These anterior and posterior circulations are connected in the brain through a very important artery called the posterior communicating arteries. So this is another pictorial representation of what portions of the brain does the anterior circulation given by the two internal carotid arteries and the posterior circulation given by the two vertebral arteries provide. So we have the telencephalon giving the cerebrohemispheres, basal ganglia, the diencephalon giving the thalamus and the hypothalamus, which are mainly supplied by your internal carotid arteries. And then you have your mesencephalon, metencephalon, the myencephalon, mainly provided by the two vertebral arteries. So now we'll talk in depth on anterior circulation, which I mentioned is provided by the two internal carotid arteries. So let's look at where the internal carotid artery comes from. So you have the ascending aorta and its four main branches, right from the heart. The mnemonic is ABCs, ascending aorta, brachiocephalic, common carotid, and the S4 subclavian artery. So your right common carotid comes from the brachiocephalic artery. The left common carotid comes directly off of the arch of the aorta. So we have the left and the right common carotid. It ascends through the neck and at the level of C4 cervical vertebra, it bifurcates or bifurcates into internal carotid and the external carotid. So the internal carotid moves posterior laterally, and the external carotid moves medially and anteriorly, and the internal carotid enters the skull, whereas the external carotid stays outside. I just put this slide so that you guys can appreciate the anatomy of internal carotid artery and the vertebral artery relative to each other in real life. So on the right is the angiographic picture and on the left you guys can compare it to the cartoon labeled with the with the different structures and what you guys see in your textbooks and online with the cartoon version is exactly the actual drawing of what we have in real life anatomy so on the green again is your internal carotid artery coming off of the common carotid at the level of C4 vertebra, and the red is your vertebral arteries coming off of the subclavian, and they join in the middle to form the basilar artery, which we will soon talk about. Your two internal carotid arteries travel on the side of the neck in what's called the carotid sheath. So inside the carotid sheath, you have the internal carotid artery, you have the internal jugular vein, and you have the vagus nerve traveling inside it together. And at the level of C4, it again bifurcates into your internal carotid artery and external carotid artery. The internal carotid artery travels inside the skull through the carotid canal, which is the petrospersion of your temporal bone. And once the internal carotid artery is inside the skull, it's called intracranial ICA, and outside the cranium, it's called extracranial ICA. And then the intracranial ICA travels through the cavernous sinus, which we will talk about in the future slides. So here you can see the cavernous sinus. It's a venous structure. And that's next to a bony structure called the cellotorcyca inside the brain. The cellotorcyca is the bone where your pituitary sits in, which you guys will also learn in the future. And then it enters, traverses the dura. So you have the dura we talked about in the menageal lecture. Once the ICA is inside the dura, it's called the intradural ICA. And then the intradural ICA gives off four important branches, which has a mnemonic OPAM. So you have the ophthalmic artery, you have the posterior communicating artery, anterior cerebral artery, and middle cerebral artery, all of which are very important to talk about. the four intradural branches of ICA are heavily tested on all kinds of exams you'll be ****** on it on your third year clinicals as well so those are your what's known as the opam mnemonic ophthalmic artery right here it's the first branch coming off another heavily tested question what is the first branch of the intradural ICA so that's your ophthalmic artery the small one right here. And then the ICA gives off your posterior communicating artery, which we talked about before, is the artery that connects your anterior circulation and the posterior circulation. So you have your posterior communicating artery. And then the two terminal branches of your ICA, the big branches are your middle cerebral artery that goes laterally into the brain, and the anterior cerebral artery that gives blood supply to the anterior portion of the brain. Another thing that attendings often like to ask is the branches of internal carotid artery in the neck. It actually doesn't give any branches. That's one way you can differentiate between the ICAN and the ECA when you're looking at any radiological images. The ECA has many branches in the neck, whereas the ICA, the internal carotid artery, has no branches in the neck. It does have branches once it traverses the skull, which is the intracranial ICA. The intracranial ICA has branches which you guys are not required to know and then it has four main branches once it traverses the dura so that's the intradural branches so keep those in mind. The first branch of your intradural ICA is your ophthalmic artery and it travels with the optic nerve and the ophthalmic vein through the optic canal or the optic foramen to supply the eye as the name suggests And since this is the first branch of the intradural ICA, so you can imagine a thrombus or an emboli coming from the heart that travels through the internal carotid artery, it can easily get dislodged in this tiny bifurcation here. So the occlusion of the ophthalmic artery, which is symptomatic, which can be symptomatic, is called a morosis fugax. It's a very heavily tested topic. And this happens when there is transient ischemic attack or TIAs, which are a harbinger for strokes that can happen later. So patients often describe this as a transient planeless vision loss due to the lack of perfusion of the ophthalmic artery. And people say it's like a curtain, like a shade coming over my eye. And this is a very important symptom to look out for when patients come in, because this can indicate that they might have already had a ****** or can have strokes in the future. We will talk about this more in the cerebrovascular lecture in pathology. The second branch of the intradural ICA is the posterior communicating artery, which is indicated in yellow here, connecting the orange, which is the anterior circulation, and the blue, or the cyan, is the posterior circulation. And the PCOM is very important And the patency of PCOM is important so that we know that the anterior circulation communicates with the posterior circulation. Often, there are people who only have one patent posterior communicating artery. And sometimes that's enough. As long as you have at least one patent posterior communicating artery, your anterior posterior circulation can communicate and have collaterals. But you can imagine somebody who has a left hypoplastic posterior communicating artery then gets a ****** that occludes the right posterior communicating artery, then you're at a major risk of having an anterior or a posterior circulation ******, which can be very fatal. The anterior of the terminal branches of internal carotid artery is your anterior cerebral artery or ACA. It is a very important big branch of the ICA that supplies your anterior and medial portions of the brain. And this bifurcation of the ICA, which is right here, it happens under the frontal lobe in the medial portion of your sylvian fissure. So you can see the sylvian fissure right here. That's the separation of your frontal lobe from temporal lobe. So the ICA bifurcates into ACA or anterior cerebral artery and MCA or the middle cerebral artery in the medial portion of the cillian fissure under the frontal lobe. And the ACA travels on top of your optic chiasm which you can see right here. So I want you to appreciate the structures, the neurovascular structures near it. So you have your ACA traveling on top looping around the optic chiasm and the optic nerve. and then it travels along the interhemispheric longitudinal fissure, and it travels anteriorly. And so you have your left ACA and your right ACA, which communicates with each other through your anterior communicating artery, which is a very small but very important artery that communicates your left and right frontal lobes, basically, as the left and right ACA supplies your left and right medial portions of the frontal lobe. And the main supply of your medial and anterior portion of the frontal, temporal, and parietal regions comes from the ACA. So it's quite an important branch of ICA. So let's focus on this picture right here. This is straight from your USMLE Step 1 book from the neurology portion, a very heavily tested topic. So let's look at what it's showing so you have three pictures of the brain on the left on the first the first one is you're you're seeing the brain from the left side the whole cerebrum from the left side the middle picture is a mid-sagital cut of the brain and the final picture is a inferior view of the brain and focusing on the anterior cerebral artery that's your yellow so you can see how it provides blood supply to the anterior portion of your frontal lobe and the top portions of your parietal lobe. And in the mid-sagital cut, you can see how it provides extensive blood supply to the medial portions of the frontal lobe. So you can see it all over here, medial portions of the parietal lobe, and also you have the anterior portion of the corpus callosum, the white matter tract that connects your left and right cerebral hemispheres, and the gyri that goes over it, your cingulate gyrus. And in the inferior cut, you can appreciate how the anterior cerebral artery provides blood supply to the gyri ****** or the straight gyri of the frontal lobe. And in this cartoon picture, again, a mid -sagital cut, you can see how the ACA medially branches from the ICA and travels anteriorly. And this big branch goes around your cingulate gyrus, again, Again, your pericolosal artery, you guys will see that in your neuroanatomy lab, not required to know for my lecture. And you can see, again, extensive branching of the ACA medially going up and providing blood supply to the medial portions of your precentral gyrus or your motor cortex and your postcentral gyrus, your medial portions of the postcentral gyrus are the somatosensory cortex. You can see it here, the medial frontal lobe and medial somatosensory cortex. And another thing that I want you guys to appreciate is that you can see how the ACA is coming on top of the optic chiasm. So the ACA travels above the optic nerve and the chiasm. That's an important anatomical mark to understand and know, especially during neurosurgical procedures. And finally, you have the largest terminating branch of ICA, the middle cerebral artery. And as we mentioned, again, the middle cerebral artery is the bifurcation going laterally from the ICA. Again, the bifurcation happens under the frontal lobe medial to the sylvian fissure. So the sylvian fissure is, again, that separation between your frontal lobe and temporal lobe. And you can see your ICA coming in through the neck enters interdurally, first gives off the ophthalmic artery, then the posterior communicating artery, and then medially it gives off the anterior cerebral artery, and laterally it gives off the middle cerebral artery. And the middle cerebral artery travels through that sylvian fissure between your, that fissure between the frontal and temporal lobe, and then it travels around your, that fifth hidden lobe, the insular cortex. And once it wraps around the insular cortex, then it comes out of the lobe and then wraps around the lateral parts of the cortex, giving off the major cortical branches that supplies the lateral portions of your frontal, temporal, and parietal lobes. So again, take a look at this picture. Again, your ICA comes in and laterally the MCA bifurcates. The M1 branch goes through the sylvian fissure, the M2 branch goes through the insular cortex, wraps around, and the M4 comes out cortically, giving off the cortical branches. The M1, M2, M3, M4 branches I just mentioned for the complete net sakes, you guys are not tested on it. So again, important to understand the middle cerebral artery provides much of the supply for the lateral parts of the frontal lobe, your parietal lobe, and your temporal lobe. So remember, you have the motor and sensory homunculus, the lateral portions, those are supplied by your MCA branches. A very important clinical vignette of the MCA is that they have these tiny arteries of the MCA called the lenticulostriate arteries, as you can see here. They supply the basal ganglia. Basal ganglia is a collection of nucleus, subcortical gray matter, and these lenticulostriate arteries, which are branches of MCA, because they're tiny and have thin walls, in cases of uncontrolled, untreated hypertension, they can have this bulging because the small arteries are subjected to high pressure. So they can balloon out. And at one point, they can hemorrhage, causing hemorrhagic ******. And when they do, they're called Chakot -Bouchard aneurysms, very heavily tested topic. And these Chakot -Bouchard aneurysms, these hemorrhagic strokes have a classic presentation on a CT. So this here is a CT of the brain. And you can see the white on a CT usually indicate hemorrhage, acute blood. So this is an acute bleed in the basal ganglia region. That is a classic presentation, classic radiology of Chakot-Buschard aneurysms, which you see in an uncontrolled hypertensive patient. um that was a hemorrhagic ****** but these lenticulostriate arteries are also prone to get ischemic strokes this is when you have a an emboli or thrombus distalging from your heart and can get stuck in these tiny vessels and can cut off blood supply to basal ganglia in that region which then causes ischemia and can further cause infarction and in an mri so this is a t2 weighted MRI. I know this is T2 because in T2 your fluid, your CSF is white. So I can look at the ventricles and see the ventricles are white so that I know this is a T2 weighted MRI. If the ventricles are black on the other hand then it's a T1 weighted MRI. So on a T2 weighted MRI you'll see what's called a lacuna ****** or lake-like. It looks like a white lake in a black black surrounding. So that is a ischemic ****** of the lenticular striate arteries, which are both of these are heavily tested. And we'll talk about it more further in the cerebrovascular pathology lecture. So now that we have talked about the terminal branches of ICA, the anterior ACA, anterior cerebral artery, and your lateral MCA, middle cerebral artery, we can further look into their blood supply regions. So because ACA supplies your medial portions of the frontal lobe, specifically the somatosensory cortex in the parietal lobe and the motor cortex in the frontal lobe, your precentral gyrus and your postcentral gyrus, you know the motor and the sensory homunculus. The homunculus is basically how different portions of the motor and the sensory cortex correlate to different portions of the body that's supplied to. So the medial portion of both motor and the sensory homunculus is your leg and your trunk. So your leg and your trunk, because the medial portions are supplied by your ACA, if you have an ACA ******, ischemic or hemorrhagic ******, then you can expect your leg and your trunk to be affected. Whereas your lateral portions of your motor and sensory cortex, that correlates to your hand and your face, and those are supplied by your middle cerebral artery. So then you can expect a ******, either ischemic or hemorrhagic ******, to affect your, when it's affecting the MCA, it will have deficits in your face and your hands. That's how when somebody comes in to the ER, they have ******-like symptoms, you actually try to see where in the body are they having the ****** -like symptoms, then you can easily correlate to what part of the brain is a patient having a ****** on. So now take a quick second, or not a second, quick two minutes, and go through the intradural branches of your ICA, which makes up the anterior circulation, go through each of them and try to answer these four questions. If you can, then you've done a good job in understanding and memorizing the concept that we talked about so far. We'll now talk about the posterior circulation, which we mentioned is supplied by the two vertebral arteries that enters posteriorly and supplies the posterior regions of the brain. The two vertebral arteries originate from the two subclavian arteries that comes off of the aorta, and they get their name, vertebral arteries, because they travel through the transverse foramen of the C6 through C1 cervical vertebra. So that's why you can see here the vertebral arteries traveling through the transverse foramen of C6 through C1, and they enter the cranium via the foramen magnum, which is that big opening through which your spinal cord travels, and they enter lateral and anterior to the brainstem, and near the pontomedullary junction, they fuse to form the basilar artery. The branches of the vertebral arteries plus the basilar arteries together are called the vertebro-basilar system, and they give the posterior circulation infratentorially. So everything below the tentorium, which separates the cerebellum and the cerebrum right here, that is supplied by the vertebral basilar system. And supratentorially, that's your posterior cerebral artery. So the two vertebral arteries comes posterior laterally. So you can see it traveling posteriorly, looping around. And then it comes anteriorly to the brainstem. and around the point of medullary junction, the two vertebral arteries fuse together to form the one basilar artery. Before it becomes the basilar artery, the vertebral artery gives off two main branches. So you have the anterior spinal artery coming off of the two vertebral artery becoming one and you have one anterior spinal artery that supplies blood to the ventral portion of the spinal cord. And then you have two posterior inferior cerebellar artery, or most often just referred to as pica, that comes off of the two vertebral arteries. So here is your pica here that, as the name suggests, supplies most of the posterior lobe of the cerebellum here. And then the two vertebrals join together, and the first branch coming off of that is your anterior inferior cerebellar artery or the ICA. So if there's a posterior inferior then it has to be anterior inferior. So the anterior inferior cerebellar artery as the name suggests supplies most the inferior portions of the anterior lobe of the cerebellum right here. And then you have these tiny small branches coming off of the basilar called the pontine arteries that supplies the blood to the pons. And finally, you have the superior cerebellar artery that supplies most of the superior medial and superior lateral cerebellum. So most of the cerebellum is supplied by the superior cerebellar artery. And then the terminal branches of the basilar system forms the PCA which is not part of the vertebral basilar system. I just thought I'd include a angiographic variant from my own research. You guys are not tested on this. I just thought this was cool. So we expect the pica which is a posterior inferior cerebellar artery to come from the vertebral artery and the aica which is the anterior inferior cerebellar artery to come from the basilar artery. But in this angiographic variant, which has never been reported before, we saw that the left pica here came from the basilar artery, and it came distal to the left aica, which is never, never reported. And the right pica actually came directly from the right SCA, the superior cerebellar artery. So this just goes to show that cerebrovasculature is very diverse. And especially the posterior circulation and especially the cerebellar arteries are reported to be very, very variant. So it's important to understand the normal anatomy, but when you look at the clinical images, it might not correlate. And these are important to know because then if there's ****** of any of these arteries, it can affect the patient different than what you normally expect it to. So this is just a cool thing for you guys to appreciate. Finally, the terminal branch of the basilar artery is your PCA or your posterior cerebral artery. So you can see the basilar artery giving its last bifurcation terminal branch of the PCA. It goes around and supplies the inferior and medial portions of the occipital lobe. So it wraps around the middle midbrain over here and then goes and supplies the occipital lobe. So look at the branching. And the PCA is supratentorial. So we talked about the tentorium cerebelli, which is that dural fold that separates the cerebrum from the cerebellum. So PCA supplies the posterior parts of the brain supratentorially, and the vertebral basilar system that we talked about is infratentorial and supplies the posterior circulation below the tentorium. And also look at the neural structure that goes in between your PCA and your superior cerebellar artery, SCA. So that, also appreciate here, I put this picture, so here is your posterior cerebral artery and your superior cerebellar artery, and you have your cranial nerve 3 that comes in between. So imagine this is your PCA, this is your SCA, your cranial nerve 3 goes in between. So you can imagine a medial aneurysm of either of these arteries, PCA or SCA, it can compress on the oculomotor nerve, and that usually happens when there's an aneurysmal rupture of either of those two arteries, the patients can present with oculomotor nerve palsies with the extraocular muscles not working. So that's an important clinical vignette to keep in mind. Now I want to talk about these special regions of the brain that are kind of exceptions to the areas that we talked about in that they don't get blood supply from one specific cerebral artery. Instead, they get kind of end zone blood supply from two different cerebral arteries. And these are called watershed areas. So instead of one artery, like let's say ACA providing all the blood supply, they get kind of the end blood supply from ACA, MCA, or MCA, PCA. They're kind of like your middle child that doesn't get enough attention. And because they are kind of like these border zones that get end blood supply from the ends of two different cerebral arteries, during times of global hypoperfusion, they might not get enough blood supply because the blood supply is going to bigger areas that are supplied by each of the arteries. They're not getting enough love. So they are prone to infarction or ******, ****** and infarction during global hypoverfusion. So you have two big regions. They call the cortical watershed zones. So you have in the, these are T1 -weighted MRIs. I know it's T1 because the CSF is black. So in this T1-weighted MRI, you can see the anterior cortical watershed area. So this is a region supplied by the ACA and MCA, and there's the posterior cortical watershed area region supplied by MCA and PCA. And these on D is your paramedian watershed area, which are supplied by MCA and ACA, and the deep or the subcortical watershed zone supplied by ACA and MCA. So below, you can see the white in the T1 weighted MRI is showing the stroked out regions. So this patient might have had a global hypotensive episode where they stroked out this region that was supplied by MCA and PCA, this subcortical region that was supplied by ACA and MCA, and again, same thing, this paramedian structure that was supplied by ACA and PCA, ACA and MCA. Also, another board -relevant topic. Finally, you have the spinal arteries, which comes off of the vertebral artery that we mentioned. So you have the two vertebral arteries giving the anterior spinal artery that becomes one that travels ventrally and supplies the anterior spinal cord. So you can see there's one anterior spinal artery. And the posterior inferior cerebellar artery supplies the posterior inferior spinal artery. Remember the pica, posterior inferior cerebellar artery, comes off of the two vertebral arteries and they give off the posterior inferior spinal artery. So there's two posterior spinal arteries and one anterior spinal artery. And because the anterior spinal artery supplies the ventral, anterior portions of the spinal cord, it supplies the motor part of the spinal cord. And the posterior inferior spinal artery supplies the sensory part of the spinal cord. So now that we've talked about the anterior and posterior circulation in depth, we can finally talk about the circle of villus which is basically a circular network of arteries at the base of the brain and they provide a collateral circulation and they're formed by the anterior and posterior circulation and the main player in connecting everything the anterior and the posterior is your posterior communicating artery or the PCOM. So they basically act as a safeguard so let's say there is the ****** of the artery on the right side in the frontal region as long as you have a patent anterior, a patent circle of villus, there's still collaterals to come through from other parts of the brain that can still provide that ******, that region. And the circle of villus, also called the cow, endearingly, although I would not use that word in a clinical setting. People don't like that, especially neurosurgeons don't like that word. The circle of villus is a common site of development of what's called aneurysm. And usually when we talk about aneurysm, we're referring to a saccular or bary aneurysms. And if they rupture from the circular villus, they go into the subarachnoid space and causes subarachnoid hemorrhage. And there is a very, very large amount of anatomical variation of circular villus. And we see that throughout when we do CTAs or angiograms. And only 30 to 50% of individuals have a fully patented circle of villus. So as I said, mentioned before, if you have any hypoplastic right posterior communicating artery, as long as there is a patent left posterior communicating artery, all of the brain will still get blood supply because of the beautiful circle of the list. At this point of time, you guys should be able to look at this picture and be able to identify all the arteries that I have highlighted in the red. This will be an important slide to remember for both your comp and for your future board exams. I put this picture to kind of challenge you guys. Can you look at this CT angiogram, CTA, and identify, kind of orient yourself and identify the structures. So you can cleanly see the circle of villus in the CTA, but are you able to identify this? This is also a good way to kind of get you guys thinking clinically and get used to looking at radiological images that you will see in your third -year clinicals, even though if you don't end up going into neuro, you'll be kind of asked to look at it and maybe judge what you see. So here's the highlighted labeled version of the CTA that, you know, you can look at your own time. You won't be tested on this particularly. So take a couple of minutes and think through the different arteries that we talked about that makes up the infratentorial and supratentorial posterior circulation, and can you answer these four questions for each of these arteries. If you can, then you're ready to move on to the next portion. So we talked in depth about the arterial supply of the brain. Now we'll shift gears and talk about the venous drainage of the brain. We'll cover the cerebral sinuses, deep cerebral veins, and the superficial cerebral veins. So on the right here is a angiogram of the brain. I've been kind of introducing you guys to radiological images that you will be exposed to in your clinical. So I showed you guys CT of the brain, CTA, MRI, and here's an angiogram, which is basically you inject a dye into the femoral artery and then it travels through the aorta and pumps into the ICA and the vertebral arteries and it lights up the arteries and veins of the brain and you're basically taking continuous x-rays. So first you will see the arterial system and after a while you see the dye going through the arterial system and draining through the venous system. So this image was taken when the artery was going through the venous system. So you can see the main sinuses of the brain and some of the veins that we will talk in depth in the next few slides. One of the main parts of the cerebrovenous system is the cerebral sinuses, appropriately called dural sinuses, because they are enfoldings, channels created by the enfoldings of the dura. So here you can see the superior sagittal sinus, this hole that is formed by the periosteal dura and the meningeal dura. So you have the foc cerebrae that comes down that forms the superior sagittal sinus, and the foc cerebrae comes down through the longitudinal fissure and joins the tentorium cerebelli and forms that channel here called the straight sinus and laterally you have the periosteal dura that's joining the tentorium cerebelli to form the transfer sinus. So they're basically channels formed by the dura mater in foldings and they carry the deoxygenated blood. They're unlike the veins because they lack the three tunica layers that the vein has. They don't have the valves and the valves are simply dura mater and they're important in communicating with the actual venous system and the CSF. So in this picture, you can see the arachnoid membranes here, and that space is your subarachnoid space. That's where the CSF is. So the CSF travels through the subarachnoid space, and there are outpouchings into the sinuses. These are arachnoid outpouchings called arachnoid granulations or arachnoid villi. This is how the CSF communicates with the subarachnoid space into the sinuses. So The CSF travels through all the ventricles and ends up in the subarachnoid space through the arachnoid granulations and goes into mainly the superior sagittal sinus and then they connect through other sinuses and ends up in the internal jugular vein which takes the venous blood, including the CSF, into the heart and it gets reoxygenated. So what are the cerebral sinuses to know? So the most important one is your sagittal sinus that goes midline through that sagittal suture that you can see right underneath the sagittal suture is your superior sagittal sinus that traverses the interhemispheric fissure on top. It drains the superficial cortex. So these are the tiny bridging veins that you see that drain into the superior sagittal sinus. And then parallel to the superior sagittal sinus inferiorly, draining the more subcortical brain and the internal structure is your inferior sagittal sinus. And the inferior sagittal sinus drains into what's called a straight sinus because it looks straight. And the superior sagittal sinus and the straight sinus meet at the joining point called the confluence of sinus, also called the torcular heterophili. The torcular heterophili then drains into the transverse sinus where it means. So the transverse sinus kind of goes transversely over the laterally, the occipital lobe. And the transverse sinus then drains into the sigmoid sinus, which is the little traversed sinus on the below kind of near the ear region. And the sigmoid sinus finally connects the sinus system into the venous system by draining into the internal jugular vein that exits the skull through the jugular foramen. You also have the cavernous sinus which is kind of in deep and it's a unique structure that kind of drains the face and the nose that we'll talk further about. This is a angiogram of the left internal cord artery so what you're seeing is the late venous phase after the iodine dye has filled through the arterial phase. This could be a picture that you might be asked to identify during your exams. In this picture, I want you guys to appreciate how the superior sagittal sinus drains these superficial veins from the cortex. So you have some of the bridging veins and the superficial veins draining into the superior sagittal sinus. You're unable to appreciate the inferior sagittal sinus because the superior sagittal sinus is blocking the view. The superior sagittal sinus joins the straight sinus medially at the confluence of sinuses, which then drains into the transverse sinus the green, which then meets up with your sigmoid sinus in the purple, and the sigmoid sinus drains both your superior petrosal sinuses, the cavernous sinus, into it, and then it all meets at the jugular bulb into the internal jugular vein that goes through the jugular foramen. The superior sagittal sinus is formed by the enfolding of the foc cerebrae, and it travels enter immediately in between the intrahemispheric fissure right underneath that sagittal suture. So this location is very important in terms of neurosurgical interventions because when you do any kind of craniotomies, you try to stay away from that sagittal suture because of the location of superior sagittal sinus, and you don't want to accidentally injure the superior sagittal sinus because it can be a very hard complication to manage. You'll get a lot of venous bleed. And you can see these bridging veins and the cortical veins that drain into the superior sisal sinus. It comes posteriorly to join the confluence of sinus, which then drains into the transfer sinus and then into the sigmoid sinus. These bridging veins, injury to them can cause subdural hematoma that we will talk about in the future. Once the venous blood meets at the confluence of sinus, then the next path is through the lateral sinuses, called the transverse sinus, which lies in the lateral groove of the occipital bone, and it's mainly formed by the periosteal dura laterally and the tentorium cerebellum, cerebellum. The blood then travels into the sigmoid sinus at that sigmoid transverse junction. And finally, through the sigmoid sinus, it then joins the internal jugular vein, which exits the skull through the jugular foramen, which also has multiple other cranial nerves that travels through it, which are your vagus nerve, your glucopharyngeal nerve, and your accessory nerve. So that is an important landmark during neurosurgical procedures. The cavernous sinus is a unique dural sinus system. It is located on the either side of the cellotorsica, which is that bony structure that contains pituitary gland that we talked about before. It contains important neurovascular structures, including the cavernous ICA that you can see traveling through, and multiple cranial nerves. It has cranial nerve 3, ocular motor nerve, cranial nerve 4, trochlear nerve, cranial nerve V1, V2, the ophthalmic and maxillary branch of trigeminal nerve, and cranial nerve 6, the abducens nerve, and it's the most medially located in the cavernous sinus. So because of its medial proximity, anytime there's lesions of the ICA or the pituitary gland, pituitary adenomas and stuff, it can mainly manifest as an abducens nerve palsy. The deep cerebral veins, they drain the deep structures of the brain such as the basal ganglia, thalamus, and internal capsule. There's the great cerebral vein, vein of Galen, internal cerebral vein, basal veins of Rosenthal, all of which you don't have to memorize by name. But what you need to understand is that the deep cerebral vein mainly drain into the inferior sagittal sinus and mainly to the straight sinus. So that's the main draining vein where all the deep cerebral veins come into and the straight sinus then meets the rest of the sinus at the confluence of sinus going to then to the transverse sinus into the sigmoid sinus and the internal jugular vein. The straight sinus we talked about earlier is formed by that foc cerebri coming down through the inter-hemispheric fissure and joining the tentorium cerebelli. The superficial cerebral veins, there are three that you should know by name. There is the superficial middle cerebral vein, or the sylvean vein, as you can see it drain over the sylvean fissure. This is an important landmark during sylvean approach we go into that parts the frontal and the temporal lobe during neurosurgical interventions, and we try to not injure these veins, very important draining veins. There's the vein of Trollard, or the superior anastomotic cerebral vein, which drains both into the superior sagittal sinus and also into the vein of Labbe, also called the inferior anastomotic cerebral vein, that mainly drains into the transverse sinus and then into the sigmoid sinus. Here is a DSA kind of showing, sorry, MRV, magnetic resonance of the veins, showing each of those three veins. Now that we have talked about the drural sinuses, the deep venous system, and the superficial venous system, it's important to put it together to talk about the overall direction of drainage. This is a very busy slide, but it does show you the direction of drainage. So you have the superior sagittal sinus mainly draining the superficial system and the bridging veins. And here's the angiogram. Now you guys can look at an angiogram and know that it's an angiogram, but this is on the venous face. So you can see these tiny cortical veins and the bridging veins that are draining. So these arrows are pointing to the direction of the drainage. So you see the draining into the superior sagittal sinus. and then you can see the internal veins, the deep drainage system, you can see the inferior sagittal sinus here connecting into the straight sinus as well as the other deep veins draining into the straight sinus which all of which then join at the confluence of sinuses right here and then once it joins there it travels through the transverse sinus, right you see the transverse sinus here, as well as in the lateral picture, you see the transverse sinus here that then joins into the sigmoid sinus, but finally ends up in the internal jugular vein at that jugular bulb region and exits the skull through the jugular foramen. An important pathology of the venous system is cerebrovenous thrombosis, which is when you have a blood clot in the dural sinuses or the cerebral veins, which then causes blocking of the venous drainage from the brain. On the right, you have a MRV, magnetic resonance imaging of the vein. So you have the gadolinium dye that's lighting up the superior sagittal sinus, your right transfer sinus, right sigmoid sinus, and the internal jugular vein. But you don't see that happening on the left side. And this is because you have a cerebrovenous thrombosis of the transverse sinus at the junction of the confluence of sinus. So the classic board presentation is a pregnant lady coming in with severe headache, vomiting, and now she has focal neurological ******-like symptoms. Anytime there is a risk factor of hypercoagulose states, which is seen in pregnancy, contraceptive use, malignancy, inflammatory diseases, you have a high chance of getting CVT. So now take a couple of minutes to see if you can test yourself in your understanding of cerebrovenous system by going through these four points. Here's a clinical question similar to what you can expect in your comp as well as board exams, complex level one and step one. Take a few moments and see if you can answer it. So your brocus area is your area of the brain that controls fluency of the speech. So in the green, you can see the brocus area highlighted, which is in the inferior frontal gyrus. And it's no surprise that the brocus area is adjacent to the motor cortex that deals with the mouth. So in the sensory homunculus, you'll see that this is where the motor function of the mouth is located. As well as your Wernicke's area in the pink, that is responsible for understanding of the speech. If you have lesions there, you'll have nonsensical speech. And that's located in the posterior superior temporal gyrus. So the Broca's area, lesions there, is called expressive aphasia, affecting your fluency. And lesions of the Wernicke's area causes receptive aphasia, problems with understanding. Both of these areas are supplied by the distal cortical branches of the MCA. So now you guys understand the answer is middle cerebral artery. Here the patient is obviously having a receptive aphasia, so it is a ****** of the Wernicke's area, not the Broca's area. And you can clearly see here, this is the posterior superior temporal gyrus that is stroked out. So that's a specific distal portion of the MCA that's infarcted. Now we have arrived at the favorite part of my lecture, where we get to talk about the actual clinical pathologies of these arteries that we talked about. We will cover the intracranial bleeds. For each of these intracranial bleeds, I want you guys to be able to identify the location of the bleed, the cause of the bleed, the presentation of the patient when they have these bleeds, and radiological imaging, specifically CT head. I will be going over this in more depth later in the cerebrovascular pathology lecture. I just want to give you guys a quick overview of how to read a CT scan. You will not be specifically tested on this slide, but you'll be given a picture of a CT scan and be required to understand what kind of bleed it is. So these are just for your own references. A CT of the head is a density-based scan. So different colors of gray that you will see is based on different densities of the matter. The more white it is, so that's when you call it hyperdense. So anything white on the CT is referred to as hyperdense. Anything gray that is the same color of the gradient as the brain, that's called isodense. And darker things that are darker than the brain, it's called hypodense. So an acute bleed, which is what we're talking about for most of the part of the next few slides are acute bleeds, those will be white in the CT. So we will say that hyperdense lesion, whereas a chronic bleed, such as a chronic subdural hematoma, will be much darker, and those are referred to as hypodense lesions. And you can also have these bleeds over time, they are in the subacute period where they're starting to chronicize and are at the same color as the brain, and you usually refer to them as isodense lesions. Again, you're not tested on this. This is just for your reference. So we will go from superficial to deep in terms of the bleeds. So to start with, you have an epidural hematoma, and as the name suggests, it's epi above the dura. So it's formed, the clot is formed between the compartment of the periosteal dura and the skull. And this is due to almost always, 99 % of the time, due to a high-speed injury, causes skull fracture, especially in the terioral temporal region. And the skull fracture causes injury to the middle meningeal artery, which travels through the inside grooves of the skull. So it tears the middle meningeal artery, and because it's an artery, it has high pressure, the bleed builds up quickly. For the presentation, the patient usually loses consciousness right away when this happens because of the blast of blood forming in the brain. And then there's a lucid period of time where they're okay, people think they're fine, they usually go home sometimes, which can be fatal, because after that lucid period, because of the buildup of bleed and compression on the brain, you usually rapidly deteriorate. This is a very high emergency neurosurgical intervention that needs to be done. On the CT scan, when you put it on a bone window, which is what A is, you'll usually see that skull fracture. If you don't, then usually 99% of the time, it's not an epidural hematoma. You need that skull fracture. And when you put it in the brain window, which is what it is, you see that hyperdense lesion. Remember, hyperdense is acute bleed. Whatever is white is hyperdense, is acute bleed compared to the brain parenchyma. And in the CT of the head, you'll usually see it as a lens-shaped biconvex. And this is because the bleed is restricted between where the dura attaches to the sutures so it doesn't travel it stays within a region now going deeper you have the subdural hematoma which forms between the dura subdural below the dura and the arachnoid matter and this is due to the the bleed from bridging veins that we mentioned earlier so these are tiny veins that traverses through the dura and in older people when the brain shrinks or chronic alcoholics also have brain shrinks, the bridging veins have much more of a tortuous root and they can usually get torn with like small injuries. You don't have to be high-speed trauma. It could be a small fall that causes nicking of these small bridging veins and because this is a venous bleed, this builds up over time. So it's not like a rapid presentation like epidural hematoma is. It's like a very slower bleed that symptoms takes hours to weeks to develop. And on a CT, you'll see, again, this acute bleed, which we said is hyperdense lesion, and it's more of a crescent-shaped rather than a lens-shaped as in epidural hematoma. This is because these bleeds are not now restricted by the dura attaching to the suture, so it can cross suture lines. That's how you can tell the difference between epidural hematoma and subdural hematoma, where in the epidural, it's restricted within suture lines, but subdural hematoma, it can cross suture lines because it's below the dura. Now, going more deeper, you have the bleed in the subarachnoid space where the CSF circulates, and therefore it's called the subarachnoid hemorrhage. The most common reason that this happens is due to high-speed trauma, but every time you hear subarachnoid hemorrhage, what you will be tested on mostly is for ruptured aneurysms. Remember, we said the aneurysms that often develop in the circular villus, which is in the subarachnoid space. So a rupture of the aneurysm of the circular villus will cause blood to be in the CSF. And the classic presentation is the thunderclap headache, which is defined as worst headache of the patient's life, which comes on maximum intensity, worse than pain of labor without the epidural. And it's associated with neck stiffness and photophobia, which is usually because of the meningeal irritation. And in the CT head, what you see is blood in the subarachnoid space. So here, this is a classic starburst pattern. If you see this, don't even read the question. It's subarachnoid hemorrhage. It's used to a ruptured aneurysm of the circle of villus very heavily tested on the step one and level one bleed within the brain matter or the parenchyma of the brain is called the intraparenchymal or intracerebral hematoma and the most recent most common reason for this is hypertension and cerebral amyloid angiopathy, especially in older men. And these causes lobar hemorrhages, specifically hemorrhage in particular lobes of the brain. And the presentation will depend on what part of the brain is affected. So in the left CT head, you see lobar hemorrhage in the, it's not a lobar hemorrhage, actually, this is a basal ganglia hemorrhage, which we talked about before. This is the lenticulostriate hemorrhage, right, that affects the basal ganglia and called the Charcot -Boujard aneurysm, so most likely due to hypertension. On the right, you have a hemorrhage within the cerebellum, so maybe one of the superior cerebellar artery is hemorrhaged. And on the imaging, you will see that hyperdense lesion, which again shows the acute bleed. And finally, you have bleed within the ventricles of the brain called the intraventricular hematoma. and this can be primary intraventricular hematoma or hemorrhage or secondary. So primary is when the hemorrhage starts within and that's usually seen in preterm infants because of hemorrhage within the germinal center which we will talk about in the cerebrovascular pathology lecture. If you see this in adults it's usually an extension from a intraparenchymal hemorrhage And this can often cause obstruction of the ventricular system that we talked about, right? Obstructive hydrocephalus and can have symptoms that way. And usually if we see intraventricular hemorrhage in a neurosurgical setting, the management will depend on how the patient is presenting, but also usually an EVD or an extraventricular drain, you put it in to drain out the hematoma out of the ventricles is indicated. On a CT, you will see acute blood in the ventricles. So this is white. And if you're asked to read the CT, I would say hyperdense lesion within the ventricles. All right, so let's bring it all together and do a clinical question. Take a second and see if we can answer it. so there are several things in this vignette that points out to it being an epidural hematoma so to start with we have a younger patients involved in high-speed trauma so likely had a skull fracture that caused the tearing of the middle menageal artery within that skull inside the groove and then he had a initial loss of consciousness which is likely due to that instant spraying of blood over the cerebrum because of that arterial bleed which can be a shock to the system, and you can lose consciousness with that. And then over time, it recovers, so you have that lucid interval of being fine. And then the patient is showing rapid deterioration and focal neurological deficits. He has hypertension and bradycardia and likely respiratory irregularities. That is called the Cushing triad, which is a response due to high intracranial pressure. And finally, you have that lens -shaped hyperdensity that biconvex lesion, hyperdense lesion that you see in epidural hematoma, all of which is due to the tearing of middle meningeal artery. So this is a likely question, a similar question that you will see in your comp and your level one and step one. And that brings us to our end of the lecture. here is your summary slides rest of the summary slides please look over this make sure you have clear understanding of everything if you guys have any questions please feel free to email me my email is right here thank you so much for sticking until the end I know this is a long and heavy lecture but repetition is key and look at different pictures pictures can be very helpful for all of neuroanatomy good luck also please take the time to fill out this survey so that i know how to improve my future lectures thank you