Lecture 52 Content
===================

--- PDF Content ---
--- Page 1 ---
Pharmacology of Antiseizure Drugs: Part 1
Introduction to ASDs The “Big Picture”
Sodium Channel Blockers
Leslie Goldstein, Pharm.D.
Associate Professor
Division of Pharmacology
Department of Clinical Specialties
lgolds01@nyit.edu

--- Page 2 ---
I am available to groups and individuals for pharmacology 
help and discussions by appointment.
lgolds01@nyit.edu
--- Page 3 ---
1. PK properties: Explain how the main pharmacokinetic features of the antiepileptic drugs and 
their metabolic- and transport-related drug interactions relate to patient care.
2. Mechanisms: Describe the various mechanisms of antiseizure drug action at the levels of 
specific ion channels and neurotransmitter systems.
3. Therapeutic uses: Differentiate the mechanisms and effects of drugs used in the treatment of 
focal-onset seizures, generalized-onset seizures, various epileptic syndromes, and status 
epilepticus by giving specific examples.
4. Adverse effects: Correlate the adverse effects of the drugs covered in this lecture (the 
“starred drugs”) with their pharmacokinetic properties and mechanisms of action.
5. Pharmacogenomics: Explain the meaning and clinical relevance of HLA genetic 
polymorphisms on adverse event risk.
6. Drug-drug, drug-disease, drug-age interactions: Apply the distinctive class and drug-
specific toxicities to the selection of antiepileptic therapy for the individual patients, including 
children, adults, pregnant patients, and older patients.
After completing the preparation materials, students should be able to:
3
--- Page 4 ---
Required
• ScholarRx Bricks  Practice Questions 
Optional:
• Video Lecture  Dr. Goldstein’s Notes Handout  Guided Reading Questions
• Textbook resources with links are listed on the next slide
Preparation Materials (links are in the CPG and on the next slide)
SUGGESTIONS: 
• Use the resources that work best for you. 
• You do not need to study all of them. 
• Work through the GUIDED READING QUESTIONS with pen/pencil and paper. 
Try answering them in your OWN WORDS first without looking at the readings, and 
then again after reviewing.
• Practice questions (not graded): Simple Recall and Case Vignettes
4
--- Page 5 ---
ScholarRx
• Neurology and Special Senses > Seizures
• Definitions, Pathophysiology, Diagnosis, Treatment: Seizures and Epilepsy: 
https://exchange.scholarrx.com/brick/seizures-and-epilepsy 
• Pharmacology:  Drugs to Treat Seizures: https://exchange.scholarrx.com/brick/drugs-to-treat-seizures 
Access Medicine Katzung’s Basic & Clinical Pharmacology, 16e, 2024: Chapter 24: Antiseizure Drug
https://nyit.idm.oclc.org/login?url=https://accessmedicine-mhmedical-
com.nyit.idm.oclc.org/content.aspx?bookid=3382&sectionid=281750501 
Review resources with practice questions:
Access Medicine Katzung’s Pharmacology: Examination & Board Review, 14e, 2024: Chapter 24: Antiseizure Drugs
https://nyit.idm.oclc.org/login?url=https://accessmedicine-mhmedical-
com.nyit.idm.oclc.org/content.aspx?bookid=3461&sectionid=285593532 
LWW Health Libraries, Premier Basic Sciences: Lippincott’s Illustrated Reviews: Pharmacology 8e, 2023; Chapter 19: 
Drugs for Epilepsy
https://nyit.idm.oclc.org/login?url=https://premiumbasicsciences-lwwhealthlibrary-
com.nyit.idm.oclc.org/content.aspx?sectionid=253327374&bookid=3222
Links to Resources
5
--- Page 6 ---
• Epilepsy is a chronic disorder of brain function characterized by the recurrent and unpredictable 
occurrence of seizures. Approximately 1% of the world’s population has epilepsy, which is the 
fourth most common neurologic disorder after migraine, stroke, and Alzheimer disease.
• The antiseizure drugs (ASDs) described in this lecture are typically used chronically to prevent the 
occurrence of seizures in people with epilepsy.
• They are also used occasionally in people who do not have epilepsy to prevent seizures that may 
occur as part of an acute illness such as meningitis or in the early period following either 
neurosurgery or traumatic brain injury. 
• Certain ASDs terminate ongoing seizures such as in status epilepticus or prolonged febrile 
seizures or following exposure to seizure-inducing nerve toxins. 
• For seizures caused by an acute underlying toxic or metabolic disorder, such as hypocalcemia, 
appropriate therapy should be directed toward correcting the specific abnormality.
Core principles of antiseizure drug therapy
6
--- Page 7 ---
• Adequate drug exposure must be maintained continuously to prevent seizures.
• ASDs have different pharmacological profiles.
• Many ASDs have narrow therapeutic windows. Dosing must avoid toxic exposure.
• Many ASDs are metabolized in the liver. Drug interactions complicate therapy.
• ASDs are typically grouped by their principal mechanism of action. However, for many 
drugs, the precise mechanism is not known, or several mechanisms are supposed, based 
on seizure protection in diverse studies in animal models.
• Narrow spectrum agents only treat focal onset and focal evolving to bilateral tonic-clonic 
seizures. 
• Broad spectrum agents treat a broad range of seizure types, both focal onset and primary 
generalized onset seizures.
• When considering discontinuation of antiseizure therapy, the risk of seizure recurrence 
should be weighed against the risk of side effects with continued ASD treatment. Certain 
seizure types and benign epileptic syndromes may remit.
7
Core principles of antiseizure drug therapy
--- Page 8 ---
8Harrison’s; Goodman & Gilman
Introduction: Seizure / Epilepsy
Seizure: a paroxysmal 
event due to abnormal 
excessive or 
synchronous neuronal 
activity in the brain
Epilepsy: a condition in 
which a person has 
recurrent seizures due to 
a chronic, underlying 
process
Causes: many and diverse
infection, trauma, neoplasm, toxic 
substances, genetic predisposition
--- Page 9 ---
• Focal onset seizures arise from excessive, high-frequency, abnormally synchronous neuronal 
activity within a specific, discrete local population of neurons in one cerebral hemisphere. 
Neuronal hyperexcitability and hypersynchrony due to localized, rapidly firing voltage gated 
sodium channels is a hallmark of focal onset seizures. Focal seizures can also evolve into 
bilateral tonic-clonic seizures.
• Primary generalized onset seizures arise in both hemispheres simultaneously, often involving 
deep brain structures (thalamus, brainstem) and widespread cortical networks. The balance 
between excitation and inhibition across both sides of the brain is disrupted.
− Absence seizures
− Generalized tonic-clonic seizures
− Infantile spasms (West syndrome)
− Lennox-Gestaut syndrome (developmental and epileptic encephalopathy)
− Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy
− Dravet syndrome
• Status epilepticus is operationally defined as 5 minutes of continuous seizure activity or 2 
discrete seizures between which there is incomplete recovery of consciousness.
Classification of Seizure Disorders
9

--- Page 10 ---
10
Individualize ASD therapy:
• Treat underlying conditions
• Avoid precipitating factors
• Preventive therapy for 
suppression of recurrent 
seizures
• Address psychological and 
social issues
ASD therapy selection
Consider the following:
• Seizure classification and accurate diagnosis
• Potential adverse effects of the drug
• Comorbid medical conditions, especially but 
not limited to hepatic and renal disease
• Interactions with other medications 
• Age and sex, including childbearing plans
• Lifestyle and patient preferences
• Cost
Pharmacological Treatment of Seizure Disorders
Goals of therapy: 
• Controlling seizures
• Avoiding treatment side effects
• Maintaining or restoring quality 
of life
• Adequate drug exposure must be maintained 
continuously to prevent seizures.
• Most ASDs follow first-order kinetics.
--- Page 11 ---
11
Drugs for Focal Onset Seizures
Drugs for Focal Onset Seizures
and Some Generalized Onset Seizures
Lamotrigine
Lacosamide
Levetiracetam
Perampanel
Phenobarbital
Primidone
Felbamate
Cenobamate
Carbamazepine
Oxcarbazepine
Eslicarbazine
Phenytoin
Fosphenytoin
Gabapentinoids 
Drugs for Generalized-Onset 
Seizures
Valproate
Topiramate
Zonisamide
Drugs for Generalized Absence 
Seizures
Ethosuximide
Valproate
Drugs for Other Types of Seizures
Cannabidiol
(Epidiolex)
Clobazam
Benzodiazepines
Rufinamide
Stiripentol
Fenfluramine
Benzodiazepines
Diazepam
Lorazepam
Midazolam
Clobazam
Clonazepam
Clorazepate
Effective drugs based on seizure types
--- Page 12 ---
ASDs protect against seizures by interacting 
with one or more molecular targets in the 
brain to inhibit the local generation of seizure 
discharges by:
• reducing the ability of the neurons to fire 
action potentials at a high rate,
• reducing neuronal synchronization,
• inhibiting the spread of epileptic activity to 
nearby and distant sites by: 
o strengthening the GABAergic inhibitory 
activity, and/or 
o inhibiting glutamate-mediated excitatory 
transmission.
o stabilizing membrane potential via K+ 
channels
VG Na+ channels: 
Drugs that preferentially bind to the open and 
inactivated state of voltage-activated Na+ 
channels on presynaptic membranes → limit 
the sustained, repetitive firing of neurons
VG T-type Ca2+ channel: 
Inhibition of voltage-activated Ca2+ channels 
responsible for T-type Ca2+ currents in 
thalamocortical neurons for management of 
absence seizure
Modulation of various other Ca 2+ channel types
GABA / Glutamate: 
Drugs that enhance GABA-mediated synaptic 
inhibitory effect, and/or diminish glutamate’s 
excitatory effects
What is the common thread that connects this diverse group of antiseizure drugs?
12
The 3 major categories are:
Na⁺ and Ca²⁺ channel modulation are the largest mechanistic classes of antiseizure drugs.
--- Page 13 ---
A) Excitatory glutamatergic synapse 
B) Inhibitory GABAergic synapse 
Presynaptic targets 
diminishing glutamate release: 
• Voltage-gated (VG) Na+ channels
• VG K+ channels
• 2-1 Ca2+ channels
• SV2A synaptic vesicle proteins
Postsynaptic targets 
at excitatory synapses:
• AMPA or NMDA glutamate receptors
• T-type VG Ca2+ channels
• VG K+ (KCNQ) channels
Inhibitory synapses and in astrocytes:
• GABA transaminase (GABA-T)
• GABA transporter (GAT-1)
• Synaptic GABA-A receptors
• High GABA levels resulting from blockade of GABA-T may 
act on extra-synaptic GABA-A receptors
“The Big Picture” – mechanisms identified in in vitro studies
Molecular targets for antiseizure drugs
13
Citation: Chapter 24 Antiseizure Drugs, Katzung BG, Vanderah TW. Basic & Clinical Pharmacology, 15e; 2021, Figure 24-1. Available at: 
https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=2988&sectionid=250597700 Accessed: October 04, 2023
Copyright © 2023 McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved
TAKEAWAY
Molecular mechanisms are 
usually identified in controlled, 
reductionist in vitro studies 
and then tested in rodent 
seizure models.
It is inferred (not proven) that 
these mechanisms contribute 
to antiseizure activity in 
humans.
Antiseizure drugs are used 
because of demonstrated 
clinical efficacy for specific 
seizure types or epilepsy 
syndromes.
--- Page 14 ---
14
Class Pharmacokinetics and Relevance To Patient Care
PK Property The TAKEAWAYS
A Oral
IV
Other routes
Oral use  convenience for patients and caregivers
IV  rapid onset; hospital use
IM, intraosseous, intranasal, rectal administration if IV access not obtained
D Many ASDs >90% protein 
bound 
Widely distributed
Displacement can cause a temporary rise in free fraction  transient acute toxicity 
(Remember: narrow therapeutic windows.)
Readily diffuse across BBB to sites of action – and cause central and systemic side effects.
M
Hepatic metabolism
Active metabolites
High potential for drug-drug interactions by enzyme induction or inhibition.
• The ASDs’ metabolism / bioavailability may be altered.
• The conversion to active metabolites may be affected by other drugs.
• Some ASDs are enzyme inducers or inhibitors altering the metabolism of other drugs.
F 80-100% Good bioavailability  predictable blood levels
E Hepatic clearance and/or
Renal clearance
Hepatic and/or renal function can affect plasma drug levels.
(Remember: narrow therapeutic windows.)
t½ 
Drug-specific
Some ASDs have short half-lives  frequent daily administration
Some ASDs have longer half-lives or come in extended-release versions  less frequent 
dosing may improve adherence
--- Page 15 ---
Pharmacogenomics: Clinically important polymorphisms in HLA types
HLA-B*15:02: Carbamazepine / oxcarbazepine, phenytoin, lamotrigine association with 
Stevens-Johnson syndrome / toxic epidermal necrolysis (SJS/TEN)
HLA-B*15:02 allele occurs almost exclusively in patients of Asian ancestry. Screening is 
recommended for at-risk, treatment-naïve patients.
Severe cutaneous adverse reactions (SCAR) – Stevens-Johnson Syndrome (SJS) and toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN): Severe, acute, life-
threatening mucocutaneous hypersensitivity reactions can occur 1 to 4 weeks after starting the drug. Severe skin barrier loss  leads to fluid loss, 
electrolyte imbalance, and hypothermia. Physical and psychological sequelae may occur during the chronic phase of convalescen ce and recovery. 
Management includes screening and treatment to maintain quality of life.
• SJS: Skin detachment affecting <10% of body surface area (BSA); mortality ~10%
• TEN: Skin detachment affecting >30% of BSA; mortality >30%
• SJS/TEN overlap: Skin detachment affecting 10% -30% of BSA
Sepsis, acute respiratory distress syndrome, and multiorgan failure are the most common causes of in -hospital death.
HLA-A*31:01: Carbamazepine / Oxcarbazepine strong association with drug reaction with 
eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS). Screening is recommended in carbamazepine-
naïve patients.
HLA-A*31:01 allele is found in many populations and is more common overall: European, Japanese, 
Koreans, Chinese, South Asians
DRESS is a severe hypersensitivity reaction: Skin rash, visceral organ involvement, lymphadenopathy, eosinophilia, and atypic al lymphocytosis. The 
disease course is typically prolonged and flares can occur despite cessation of the offending drug. DRESS can occur 2 to 8 we eks after initiation of the 
drug. Estimated mortality rate is 2% -10%. DRESS survivors should undergo long -term monitoring for the development of autoimmune sequelae. 15
--- Page 16 ---
16
• Toxicity potential: The therapeutic index for most AEDs is low, and toxicity is 
not uncommon.
• Withdrawal: Gradually taper to minimize the potential of increased seizure 
frequency.
• Suicidal ideations: A consequence of the drug therapy? or, of the seizure 
disorder? (further research is needed)
• Pregnancy: Increased risk of congenital malformations; folic acid and vitamin 
K supplementation recommended
• Pediatrics: Larger Vd in neonates, infants, children; neonate has immature 
metabolic and elimination capabilities
• Geriatrics: Comorbid conditions; physiologic changes
• Drug interactions: Enzyme inducers/inhibitors; CNS depressants
 Cautions
--- Page 17 ---
Choice of ASD in pregnancy: The goal is to choose the ASD with the lowest proven risk for major congenital 
malformations and adverse neurodevelopmental consequences and administer the drug at the lowest 
effective dose prior to conception. Monotherapy is preferred if possible.
Valproate monotherapy is associated with 
the highest rates of major malformationsRecommended to avoid this group in 
patients of childbearing potential if possible.
Slide adapted by LG
--- Page 18 ---
18
Inducers of CYP3A4 and other CYPs, 
UGTs, P-glycoprotein, other 
transporters: 
• phenobarbital, primidone
• phenytoin
• carbamazepine
CYP3A4, only: 
• oxcarbazepine
• eslicarbazepine
Inhibitor of CYPs and UGTs: 
• Valproate
AEDs with high potential for drug interactions
• Many other AEDs may be weak 
inducers or inhibitors of various 
drug-metabolizing enzymes
Even weak inducers can affect levels of the 
substrate drugs with narrow therapeutic 
windows, zero order kinetics, or 
polypharmacy (burden on same enzymes).
--- Page 19 ---
19
Discontinuation of antiseizure drugs may be considered in adults and children who 
are seizure-free for 2 years or longer.
• Antiseizure drugs are generally slowly tapered, usually several weeks to months 
(no data indicating optimal tapering regimen). 
• Abrupt cessation may be associated with return of seizures and even a risk of 
status epilepticus. Some drugs are more easily withdrawn than others.
• Physical dependence occurs with barbiturates and benzodiazepine, and there is 
a well-recognized risk of rebound seizures with abrupt withdrawal.
Withdrawal of Antiseizure Therapy
--- Page 20 ---
20
Voltage-Gated Na+ Channel Inhibitors
Fast Inactivation Enhancers Other
Phenytoin Lacosamide (Slow inactivation enhancer)
Fosphenytoin • Rufinamide (Stabilizes inactivation state)
Carbamazepine
• Oxcarbazepine
• Eslicarbazepine
Lamotrigine
structurally 
related
structurally 
related
--- Page 21 ---
Citation: Chapter 20 Pharmacotherapy of the Epilepsies, Brunton LL, Knollmann BC. Goodman & Gilman's: The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics, 14e;  2023, 20-2. 
Available at: https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=3191&sectionid=269718706 Accessed: October 04, 2023
Copyright © 2023 McGraw -Hill Education. All rights reserved
Antiseizure drug–enhanced Na+channel inactivation. Some antiseizure drugs (noted in blue text) 
prolong the inactivation of the Na+ channels, thereby reducing the ability of neurons to fire at 
high frequencies. The inactivated channel itself appears to remain open but is blocked by the 
inactivation gate, I. Activation gate, A.
• Physiology: Closed resting state → depolarization to 
threshold → conformational change → open conducting 
state → Na+ influx → cell depolarization, action potential 
propagation → fast inactivation (<1 millisecond) → 
refractory period → cell repolarizes to threshold voltage 
(Illustrated on next slide.)
• Fast inactivation enhancers preferentially bind a site 
within the pore of the channel when the channel is in the 
open and inactivated state, causing it to be stabilized in 
this state, accumulate block during repetitive firing, and 
bind more strongly at depolarized potentials.
• Slow inactivation enhancers selectively enhance the 
slow inactivation state , stabilizing the Na+ channel in a 
long-lasting (seconds) nonconductive state. 
• ASDs produce state-dependent, use-dependent, voltage-
dependent block.
State-dependent block: Preferential binding of the drug for a specific conformational state of the sodium channel – open, 
fast-inactivated state (phenytoin, carbamazepine, lamotrigine) or slow-inactivated state (lacosamide).
Use-dependent block: The high-frequency trains of action potentials are more effectively inhibited than either the individual 
action potentials or firing at low-frequencies.
Voltage-dependent block: A greater fraction of sodium channels exist in the inactivated state at depolarizing potentials. 
Slide adapted by LG

--- Page 22 ---
Citation: Chapter 24 Antiseizure Medications, Todd W. Vanderah. Katzung’s Basic & Clinical Pharmacology, 16th Edition; 2024. Available at: 
https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?sectionid=281750501&bookid=3382 Accessed: December 22, 2025
Copyright © 2025 McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved
Description of voltage-gate sodium channels (to help you understand – not for memorizing)
(A1) Voltage-gated sodium channels mediate the upstroke of action potentials in brain 
neurons. Fast inactivation of sodium channels (along with the activation of potassium 
channels) terminates the action potential. 
(A2) Voltage-clamp recording of sodium channel current following depolarization, 
illustrating the time course of sodium channel gating. 
(B) Schematic illustration of the voltage-dependent gating of sodium channels between 
closed, open, and inactivated states. 
(C1) Primary structures of the subunits of sodium channels. The main α subunit, 
consisting of four homologous repeats (I–IV), is shown flanked by the two auxiliary β 
subunits. Cylinders represent α-helical transmembrane segments.
Blue α-helical segments (S5, S6) form the pore region. +, S4 voltage sensors; grey 
circles, inactivation particle in inactivation gate loop; III-S6 and IV-S6 (red) are regions 
where sodium channel–blocking antiseizure medications bind. 
(C2) Schematic illustration of the sodium channel pore composed of the homologous 
repeats arrayed around the central channel pore through which sodium flows into the 
neuron. 
The S5 and S6 transmembrane α-helical segments from each homologous repeat (I–IV) 
form the four walls of the pore. The outer pore mouth and ion selectivity filter are formed 
by re-entrant P-loops. The key α-helical S6 segments in repeat III and IV, which contain 
the drug binding sites, are highlighted. A lamotrigine molecule is illustrated in 
association with its binding site.

--- Page 23 ---
23
Phenytoin
Fosphenytoin (prodrug)
Enhances fast inactivation state
Phenytoin preferentially binds a site within the pore of the channel 
when the channel is in the open and inactivated state, 
• stabilizes the channel in the open/inactivated state, 
• accumulates block during repetitive firing, and 
• binds more strongly at depolarized potentials.
fosphenytoin
phosphate
--- Page 24 ---
Phenytoin Pharmacokinetics: Absorption and Distribution
A Oral: sodium salt or phenytoin base (“free acid” form)
100 mg phenytoin sodium  92 mg of free acid  adjust dose when switching dosage forms
I.V.: propylene glycol (40%) and alcohol (10%) and adjusted to pH ~12 for solubility
Avoid I.M. route: precipitation in tissues → irritation and painful local reactions, plus slow 
erratic  absorption
➢ Fosphenytoin: soluble prodrug → safer I.M. and I.V. use
Oral absorption of phenytoin base is formulation-dependent (chew tabs; suspension) owing to 
variations in particle size and additives between drug formulations and manufacturer: 20% to 90%. 
The sodium salt (oral capsules) is nearly completely absorbed.
D Phenytoin distributes to brain, liver, muscle, and fat
Plasma protein binding ~90%
Conditions that  free phenytoin levels can increase toxicity risk:
• Low serum albumin levels: hypoalbuminemia (liver failure); nephrotic syndrome (protein losing); 
burns (capillary leakage); pregnancy (larger blood volume); age (neonates/elderly), other 
conditions
• Displacement from albumin sites: uremia (renal failure); hyperbilirubinemia / severe jaundice, drug 
interactions 24
--- Page 25 ---
Phenytoin Pharmacokinetics: Metabolism, Excretion, t½
M Hepatic CYP2C9 (80%-90%), CYP2C19 (~10%-20%)
Good bioavailability (low hepatic extraction ratio)
Takeaway: 
− CYP2C9 inhibitors / CYP2C9 poor metabolizers → reduced metabolism,  toxicity risk 
− Phenytoin is a strong inducer of CYP2C9, 2C19, CYP3A4, P-gp, UGT1A1
− Add CYP2C19 inhibitors / poor metabolizers = further reduce metabolism,  toxicity risk.
 Monitor free phenytoin levels closely. Dosage adjustments may be necessary.
E Glucuronide metabolites; minimal active drug excreted
Renal / hepatic insufficiency: Increased free fraction may occur in patients with altered kidney or liver 
function.
 Monitoring of free (unbound) concentrations is recommended.
t½ Zero order kinetics  t½ is dependent on plasma concentration
t½ increases with increasing drug concentration
(the Vmax in infants >6 months and children is greater than in adults)
25
Recap: 
• Phenytoin (base) has erratic absorption.
• Phenytoin IV solution contains propylene 
glycol, ethanol, and adjusted to pH ~12.
• Widely distributed; high protein binding.
• Complex metabolism and enzyme induction. 
• Unpredictable levels and half-life because of 
zero order kinetics 
--- Page 26 ---
Figure: Richens A. and Dunlop A. (1975) Serum phenytoin levels in the management of epilepsy. Lancet 2: 247–248.)
Zero-order kinetics:
• Constant elimination of a fixed 
amount of drug per unit of time.
Nonlinear kinetics: 
• An increase in dose produces a 
disproportionately large increase in 
serum level when metabolic and 
binding capacity are saturated.
Drug serum levels are 
unpredictable when changing the 
dose.
Clearance and elimination t1/2 
depend on the plasma 
concentration.
PHENYTOIN exhibits Zero-Order Kinetics at therapeutic levels.
26
The figure shows the relationship between serum phenytoin 
concentration and daily dose in five patients. 
Each point represents the mean  (SD) of 3 to 8 separate measurements 
of phenytoin at steady state. 
Saturation points differ between patients.
therapeutic
range
--- Page 27 ---
27
1. Loading doses, I.V. or oral, are used to rapidly achieve therapeutic concentrations; 
monitor (check blood levels within hours)
2. Cautious adjustment of subsequent doses is recommended; several weeks may be 
required to reliably assess the results of dose changes because the time to reach 
steady state increases as the dose increases (nonlinear kinetics)
3. Maintenance doses, but not loading doses, should be lower in patients with liver 
failure, which causes reduced metabolism and hypoalbuminemia.
Patients with organ impairment may require lower doses:
4. Liver failure patients: Hypoalbuminemia and reduced drug metabolism may increase 
free fraction.
5. Kidney failure patients:. 
• Nephrotic syndrome can cause hypoalbuminemia as protein is lost in the urine.
• Kidney failure causes uremia, which may  protein binding and  free phenytoin 
concentration. (uremia: toxic accumulation of urea/nitrogenous compounds)
➢ Practice point: Measurement of free phenytoin may help guide dosing.
Clinical correlates related to phenytoin pharmacokinetics
--- Page 28 ---
28
For control of:
• Focal onset seizures (especially impaired awareness, temporal lobe) 
• Evolving into generalized tonic-clonic seizures
• Status epilepticus (slow IV infusion with continuous cardiac monitoring*)
• Prevention and treatment of seizures occurring during or following neurosurgery
Efficacious, but toxicities and complex pharmacokinetics limit its use.
Historical use: 
*Phenytoin is an antiarrhythmic agent (like lidocaine), formerly an alternative in the 
treatment of ventricular arrhythmias caused by digitalis intoxication. 
 It has largely been replaced by newer more predictable drugs.
Phenytoin Therapeutic Uses
--- Page 29 ---
29
Major side effects Neurotoxic effects, dose -
dependent: signs of toxicity
Cardiovascular with 
rapid IV admin*
Hypersensitivity features:
Rash, SJS, TEN (HLA-B*15:02)
fever, hepatotoxicity
agranulocytosis (rare) 
Nystagmus / Double vision Hypotension
Ataxia Bradycardia
Slurred speech Heart block
Folic acid deficiency
( absorption, catabolism)
Megaloblastic anemia
Sedation at high drug levels Ventricular tachycardia
Neuropathy 
− >5yr therapy or elevated drug 
concentrations
Distal sensory loss
Lower extremity areflexia
Rarely, other serious 
polyneuropathies
Ventricular fibrillation
Vitamin D deficiency – impaired 
bone mineralization
(Induction of hepatic Vit D catabolism)
Rickets / Osteomalacia
*CV side effects are rate- and dose-
dependent.
Phenytoin is a Na+ channel blocker with 
cardiac effects. However, side effects 
are largely attributable to the propylene 
glycol solvent, which is a known 
vasodilator and cardiac depressant.
Fosphenytoin can cause CV effects but 
is safer than phenytoin IV at 
recommended rates of administration.
Cosmetic side effects: 
 Gingival hyperplasia 
 Coarsening facial features 
 Hirsutism (body hair)
Infusion-related side effects:
 Extravasation 
 Purple glove syndrome
Drug interactions: High potential! Levels of phenytoin and levels of other drugs can be affected.
Additive adverse effects ADME mechs. especially through CYP induction / displacement from binding sites.
--- Page 30 ---
30
Stevens-Johnson Syndrome: mucosal bullae in a 
patient with fever, exfolliative rash, and hepatitis. 
Gingival hyperplasia
Hirsuitism
http://www.women-health-info.com/55-Hirsutism-1.html
Purple glove syndrome: Left hand edematous 
with purplish-blue discoloration without blisters
http://www.ruralneuropractice.com/article.asp?issn=0976-
3147;year=2010;volume=1;issue=2;spage=121;epage=122;aulast=Se
nthilKumaran

--- Page 31 ---
Fetal hydantoin syndrome: 
Estimated 2.4-fold increased risk for any major malformation in 
children with prenatal exposure compared to controls 
− meta-analysis data from published observational studies 
and pregnancy registries. 
Specific fetal defects associated with chronic phenytoin use in 
the pregnant woman include: 
− intrauterine growth retardation
− abnormalities of the skull and facial features
− cleft palate
− microcephaly
− mental retardation
− underdeveloped nails of the fingers and toes. 
➢ Folic acid throughout pregnancy is recommended.
Breastfeeding: Infant would be exposed to an estimated 0.5% -8% 
of maternal weight-adjusted dosage of drug in breastmilk. Some 
authorities advise against breastfeeding while taking the drug.
Phenytoin in Pregnancy
31
Figure Facial features and limb abnormalities of fetal 
hydantoin syndrome. Clinical photographs of the 
patient showing A, hypertelorism, flat and broad 
nasal bridge; B, short upturned nose, long philtrum, 
thin upper lip; C, stiff tapered fingers with hypoplastic 
fingernails; and D, hypoplastic toenails and 
digitalized great toe. 
Fetal Hydantoin Syndrome. Hegde, Avani et al.
The Journal of Pediatrics, Volume 188, 304; Sept 27, 2017
--- Page 32 ---
32
Mnemonic for Phenytoin Side Effects
P P-450, P-glycoprotein interactions (an enzyme inducer)
H Hirsutism
E Enlarged gums (gingival hyperplasia)
N Nystagmus
Y Yellowing of skin (jaundice, indicative of rare but serious hepatotoxicity)
T Teratogenicity 
O Osteomalacia (impaired bone mineralization / bone softening in children, adults) –  CYP 
induction leads to accelerated hepatic degradation of vitamin D, impaired Ca2+ absorption 
→ bone resorption
I Interference with folic acid absorption and folate breakdown → megaloblastic anemia
N Neuropathies: vertigo, ataxia, headache
S Skin coarsening; skin reactions; purple glove syndrome (I.V.)
CV Rapid IV administration or high dose: 
Phenytoin is a Na+ channel blocker and propylene glycol is a vasodilator and cardiac 
depressant
• Conduction abnormalities: Bradycardia, AV block, QRS widening, ventricular arrhythmias
• Vasodilation: Hypotension
--- Page 33 ---
33
PK Property TAKEAWAY: Relevance to Patient Care
Oral formulations having 
slow erratic absorption
Difficult to predict the effect of phenytoin base formulations between patients and in 
one patient at different times
Phenytoin IV
Fosphenytoin IV, IM
Highly alkaline solution / propylene glycol, alcohol – Slow infusion into a large vein, 
severe local irritation, closely monitor for extravasation. Avoid IM (precipitation). 
Fosphenytoin preferred – water soluble, faster infusion, safer, rarely irritating; can 
be given IM if vein not available.
Plasma protein binding
~90%
Conditions that increase free phenytoin level increase toxicity risk:
Low albumin: hypoalbuminemia, nephrotic syndrome, age (neonate / elderly)
Displacement: uremia (kidney failure)
Metabolism Hepatic CYP2C9, 2C19, 3A4
Inducer: CYP3A4, CYP2B6, CYP2C9, 2C19, UGTs, and P-glycoprotein
Clearance is not constant Zero-order kinetics, nonlinear: A small change in dose results in a disproportionately 
large change in serum concentration.
t½elimination is highly 
variable.
Metabolism follows zero-order kinetics. Elimination half -life increases with 
increasing concentration. When metabolic enzymes are saturated, a fixed amount 
of drug is metabolized per unit of time.
Check your knowledge: Fill in the column on the right.
--- Page 34 ---
Check your knowledge of adverse effects: Define the terms of the acronym
34
P P 450 and P-glycoprotein interactions
H Hirsutism
E Enlarged gums – gingival hyperplasia
N Nystagmus
Y Yellowing of skin – jaundice due to rare but serious hepatotoxicity
T Teratogenicity – Fetal hydantoin syndrome – some or all features
O Osteomalacia – induction of hepatic Vit D breakdown →  calcium uptake
I Interference with folate absorption and induction of folate breakdown
N Neuropathies – vertigo, ataxia, nystagmus; polyneuropathies with long-term use
S Skin coarsening; skin reactions; purple glove syndrome (I.V.)
CV Rapid IV administration or high dose: 
Phenytoin is a Na+ channel blocker and propylene glycol is a vasodilator and cardiac 
depressant
• Conduction abnormalities: Bradycardia, AV block, QRS widening, ventricular arrhythmias
• Vasodilation: Hypotension
--- Page 35 ---
35
Carbamazepine (CBZ)
Oxcarbazepine (OXC)
Eslicarbazepine (ESL)
Enhance fast inactivation state
iminostilbenes

--- Page 36 ---
36
Carbamazepine Oxcarbazepine Eslicarbazepine acetate
A
D
Oral
Mid-high protein binding
Oral prodrug
Moderate protein binding
Oral prodrug
Low-moderate protein binding
M CYP3A4 metabolism Rapid reduction to active MHD =  
S-liscarbazepine (predominantly)
P450 enzymes not involved.
Rapid hydrolysis to active 
S-licarbazepine (major) and 
R- licarbazepine (minor)
Bioavailability 75%-85% Good MHD bioavailability Bioavailability >90%
E Urine/feces as metabolites
negligible unchanged drug
Urine: MHD (27%),
glucuronide and other metabolites
Urine: Licarbazepine (66%),
glucuronide and other metabolites
t½ Variable, 25-65 hours because of 
autoinduction, which is usually 
complete in 3-5 weeks
Oxcarbazepine: ~2h
MHD: ~9 hours
S-licarbazepine 13-20 hours
CYP3A4 Strong inducer → 
Induces own metabolism 
(autoinduction)
Also induces, 2B6, 2C9, 1A2, 
UGT1A1, P-gp, MRP2, OATs
CYP3A4 Weak inducer
Does not induce own 
metabolism
CYP3A4 moderate inducer
Does not induce own 
metabolism
Pharmacokinetic Properties
TAKEAWAYS: Carbamazepine is a strong CYP3A4 inducer and induces its own metabolism. 
The congeners have more favorable PK profiles.
--- Page 37 ---
Carbamazepine and congeners: Therapeutic Uses
Carbamazepine: 
Gold standard – First-line option for treatment 
of focal epilepsy in all ages
CBZ is highly effective – It has been a 
comparator in nearly all modern trials and 
it is widely available, affordable, and long 
clinical experience
• Focal onset seizures and 
• Focal evolving to generalized tonic-clonic 
seizures
• Not effective and may increase frequency 
in absence, myoclonic, and akinetic 
seizures.
Nonseizure applications
• Trigeminal neuralgia 
• Hypomania and mild to moderate mania 
associated with bipolar disorder
• Bipolar major depression
Oxcarbazepine and Eslicarbazepine
• Monotherapy or adjunctive treatment of 
focal-onset seizures
in children and adults
Nonseizure applications:
Oxcarbazepine:
• Trigeminal neuralgia
• Acute mania associated with bipolar 
disorder – adjunct when first-line agents 
are ineffective or poorly tolerated
37
Carbamazepine dosing due to autoinduction:
The carbamazepine is increased gradually 
based on seizure control, tolerability, and serum 
concentrations.
--- Page 38 ---
Adverse effects and cautions: CBZ, OXC, and ESL
Acute, dose-related dizziness, sedation at high dose, ataxia, nystagmus, nausea
Hypersensitivity reactions
Rash: 3-20 days
SCARS: 1-12 weeks
after start of therapy
Severe cutaneous adverse reactions (SCARs), T cell-mediated:
SJS/TEN; DRESS (including hepatotoxicity)
HLA-B*15:02 phenotype (Asian populations) and 
HLA-A* 31:01 phenotype (European, Japanese, Korean, other Asian populations)
Genotype screening prior to initiation of therapy in at-risk populations
Hyponatremia Decreased serum sodium due to nephrogenic syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone 
(SIADH): 
Promotes insertion of aquaporins (AQP-2) in distal nephron → unregulated “free” water 
reabsorption → hyponatremia and water intoxication can occur
OXC greatest risk (incidence ~10%-73%) > CBZ  (incidence ~1%-40%) ≥ ESL 
Hematologic effects 
(low incidence, reversible)
Both bone marrow suppressive ( synthesis of red cells, white cells, and platelets) and 
proliferative effects ( synthesis of blood cells). Mechanism not known.
Pregnancy CBZ: Increased incidence of spina bifida, craniofacial defects, cardiovascular malformations. 
Other agents should be considered in patients of childbearing potential.
OXC: may be considered during pregnancy; ESL: insufficient data
Drug interactions High risk, numerous – CNS effects and metabolism/transport-related effects
SJS: Stevens-Johnson syndrome; TEN: Toxic epidermal necrolysis; DRESS: Drugreaction with eosinophilia and systemic 
symptoms – high fever, rash, hematologic and internal organ involvement 38
--- Page 39 ---
39
Left: ©2023 UpToDate® Graphic 67632 Version 18.0                   Right: : ©2023 UpToDate® Graphic 59418 Version 10.0
SJS: Generalized eruption of lesions that initially had 
a target-like appearance but then became confluent, 
brightly erythematous, and bullous. The patient had 
extensive mucous membrane involvement and 
tracheobronchitis.
TEN: Multiple bullae and areas of denuded epidermis are present.
--- Page 40 ---
What are the meaning and effect of “fast inactivation enhancers”?
• Physiology: In less than a millisecond after opening and Na+ conduction, the channel undergoes 
a conformational change (gating) and enters the inactivated state (fast inactivation).
• ASDs that are fast inactivation enhancers bind a site within the pore of the channel when the 
channel is in the open and inactivated state, causing it to be stabilized in this state, accumulate 
block during repetitive firing, and bind more strongly at depolarized potentials. High frequency 
action potentials, as in seizure activity, are preferentially inhibited.
What are the meaning, mechanism, and effect of carbamazepine autoinduction?
• Carbamazepine is metabolized by CYP3A4 and it is a strong CYP3A4 inducer. 
• It induces its own metabolism – autoinduction – which stabilizes in 3 to 5 weeks of therapy.
• Therefore, the carbamazepine dose needs to be increased gradually based on seizure control, 
tolerability, and serum concentrations. 
Why is it important to screen at-risk populations for HLA-B*15:02 and HLA-A*31:01 variant alleles 
before starting carbamazepine therapy?
• Patients with HLA-B*15:02 or HLA-A*31:01 phenotypes are at risk for rash and severe 
cutaneous adverse effects – SJS/TEN and DRESS.
Check your knowledge
40
--- Page 41 ---
What are the clinical applications of carbamazepine?
• Seizure applications: focal onset seizures and focal evolving to generalized tonic-clonic 
seizures.
• Nonseizure applications: trigeminal neuralgia; bipolar disorder associate hypomania, mania, and 
depressive episodes.
Carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, and eslicarbazepine should be avoided in what seizure types? 
Why?
• CBZ, OXC, and ESL are ineffective for and may worsen absence, myoclonic, and akinetic 
seizures.
What is the mechanism of carbamazepine-induced hyponatremia?
• Nephrogenic syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH): CBZ, OXC, and ESL 
cause upregulation of AQP-2 in the distal nephron, resulting in unregulated water reabsorption, 
which leads to low serum sodium levels (dilutional hyponatremia). 
What effects in the newborn have been associated with carbamazepine use during pregnancy?
• CBZ is associated with Increased incidence of spina bifida, craniofacial defects, cardiovascular 
malformations. Other agents should be considered in patients of childbearing potential.
What are the metabolism- and transport-related drug interactions associated with carbamazepine 
use?
• CBZ is a strong inducer of CYP3A4 and induces, 2B6, 2C9, 1A2, UGT1A1, P-gp, MRP2, OATs
Check your knowledge
41
--- Page 42 ---
42
Lamotrigine
Enhances fast inactivation state
− Some evidence indicates that lamotrigine inhibits release 
of glutamate and aspartate (excitatory neurotransmitter).

--- Page 43 ---
Lamotrigine Pharmacology
43
Pharmacokinetic profile
A Oral (various dosage forms)
D Protein binding 55%
M Hepatic glucuronidation
Bioavailability 98% (immediate release)
(without concomitant inducers or inhibitors)
E Urine, glucuronide metabolites
t½ ~24 h
• t½ more than doubled in patients taking 
valproate
• t½ reduced in patients taking strong 
broad-spectrum inducer (carbamazepine, 
phenytoin, phenobarbital, primidone)
• t½ is increased in liver insufficiency
Therapeutic uses:
Lamotrigine’s broader spectrum of seizures 
suggests that lamotrigine may have actions 
in addition to Na+ channel inhibition.
Broad spectrum
• Focal onset seizures
• Primary generalized tonic-clonic 
seizures
• Lennox-Gestaut syndrome
• Absence epilepsy (second-line)
Nonseizure uses
• Bipolar disorder
maintenance treatment – monotherapy 
or add-on
For preventing major depressive episodes
Lamotrigine does not reliably prevent manic 
episodes.
Dosing guidelines and color-coded starter kits are available 
to guide dosing and help patient adherence when initiating 
therapy with valproate or a metabolism-inducing ASD.
--- Page 44 ---
44
Most common: 
• Nausea, dizziness, drowsiness
• Low incidence of sedation and cognitive side 
effects compared with other ASDs
• Can worsen migraine headaches
• Serious hypersensitivity reactions: 
SJS /TEN / DRESS 
– usually within 2-3 months
– Screen for HLA-B*15:02 variant allele 
before starting therapy in at-risk patients 
of Asian descent
To reduce the risk of rash, the drug should be 
slowly titrated over 6 to 8 weeks – even 
more cautiously if added to valproic acid.
Lamotrigine adverse effects and cautions
PREGNANCY Lamotrigine may be considered 
in patients of childbearing potential.
Lamotrigine monotherapy has been associated 
with lower risks of major congenital 
malformations compared to some other 
ASDs.
DRUG INTERACTIONS
• Phenytoin, carbamazepine, and 
phenobarbital induce metabolism of 
lamotrigine (~50% decrease in t½)
• Valproic acid inhibits lamotrigine’s 
metabolism (~2-3x increase in t½)

--- Page 45 ---
45
Lacosamide
Enhances slow inactivation state
Slow inactivation state: Lacosamide selectively enhances the slow inactivation 
state, which stabilizes the Na+ channel in a long-lasting (seconds) 
nonconductive state. (Predominant mechanism of action.)
Fast inactivation state: Lacosamide also enhances the fast inactivation state, but with 
slower binding/unbinding kinetics.
(This mechanism is suggested in more recent studies.)
Effect: Lacosamide preferentially targets pathologically overactive neurons, 
preventing repetitive firing during sustained bursts, without broadly suppressing 
normal brain function (physiological fast inactivation) → better seizure control 
with fewer generalized side effects.

--- Page 46 ---
Lacosamide pharmacology
46
PK Oral, IV; minimal protein binding; hepatic metabolism (minor CYP); inactive 
metabolites; 100% oral bioavailability; excretion urine 40% unchanged; t½ ~13 h
Uses • Focal onset and primary generalized onset seizures
• monotherapy and add-on; adults and children
• Off-label: status epilepticus
• Locasamide is a well tolerated alternative to carbamazepine
Adverse 
effects
Generally well tolerated
• Common: dizziness, drowsiness, headache, ataxia, confusion, others
• PR interval increase (bradycardia, AV block); (ECG recommended prior to start)
o Risk factors: cardiovascular disease, cardiac conduction anomalies
• Hypersensitivity reactions reported ranging from mild skin rash → SJS/TEN and 
DRESS (no large-scale evidence of association with HLA-B*15:02 variant allele)
• Suicidal ideations and tendencies have been reported in association with 
lacosamide.
Drug 
interactions
CNS depressants may increase CNS depressant effects 
--- Page 47 ---
What are the mechanisms of action of lamotrigine and lacosamide?
• Lamotrigine: Enhances fast inactivation so recovery is slower, which leads to progressive 
reduction in available sodium channels and may inhibit the release of glutamate and aspartate.
• Lacosamide: Selectively enhances the slow inactivation state, stabilizing the Na+ channel in a 
long-lasting (seconds) nonconductive state (predominant mechanism) and binds to the fast 
inactivation state, but with slower binding/unbinding kinetics. Lacosamide preferentially prevents 
seizure activity without broadly suppressing normal brain function (physiological fast inactivation) 
→ better seizure control with fewer generalized side effects.
What is the clinical significance of the lamotrigine and lacosamide pharmacology compared with 
that of the other sodium channel blockers?
• Compared with carbamazepine, lamotrigine is effective for focal onset, focal evolving to 
generalized tonic-clonic seizures, and absence seizures with a better pharmacokinetic profile. 
Titration to therapeutic dose is slower to reduce risk of severe skin reactions.
• Lacosamide is used for focal onset, focal evolving to generalized tonic-clonic seizures, and add-
on for refractory primary generalized seizures. It has more favorable PK and adverse effect 
profiles and can be titrated more rapidly than lamotrigine.
Check your knowledge
47
--- Page 48 ---
Why does lamotrigine have specific dosing requirements when used as an add-on agent with 
valproate or phenobarbital? 
• t½ more than doubled in patients taking valproate
• t½ reduced in patients taking strong broad-spectrum inducer (carbamazepine, phenytoin, 
phenobarbital, primidone)
What are the lamotrigine dosing adjustments (in general)? Think about based on what you know.
• Valproate: Very slow dose titration (every other day)
• Inducers: Initiate at higher doses than when not taking and inducer.
• Kits are available to help patients with adherence.
What is the pathophysiologic basis of lamotrigine-associate skin reactions?
• The likelihood of rash and severe cutaneous adverse reactions, SJS/TEN, is increased in 
patients with the HLA-B*15:02 phenotype.
• Screen at-risk patients before starting therapy and initiate at low doses and slowly titrate based 
on response and tolerability.
Check your knowledge
48
--- Page 49 ---
Risk factors for a certain potential adverse effect of lacosamide are cardiovascular disease and 
conduction anomalies. What is the adverse effect?
• Lacosamide can cause increased PR interval leading to bradycardia and AV block.
Although lacosamide has no evidence of an association with HLA-A or HLA-B variant alleles, what 
adverse effects have been reported with the use of this ASD?
• Reported hypersensitivity reactions ranging from mild skin reactions to severe cutaneous 
reactions.
What are the clinical applications of lamotrigine and lacosamide?
• Lamotrigine: Focal onset seizures, primary generalized epilepsy, generalized seizures of 
Lennox-Gestaut syndrome; prevention of major depressive episodes of bipolar disorder
• Lacosamide: focal onset seizures, focal evolving to generalized tonic-clonic seizures, add-on for 
resistant primary generalized seizures. 
Check your knowledge
49

--- Page 50 ---
Summary
50
--- Page 51 ---
• Effective antiseizure drugs (ASDs) interact with one or more molecular targets in the brain. 
Based on in vitro studies, ASDs inhibit seizure generation by various mechanisms. Some ASDs 
reduce the ability of neurons to fire high frequency action potentials. Others strengthen inhibitory 
effects of GABAergic interneurons and/or reduce glutamate-mediated excitatory 
neurotransmission. Some ASDs have multiple mechanisms.
• Diagnosis of a specific seizure type is important for prescribing the most appropriate ASD 
therapeutic regimen. Drug choice is usually based on established efficacy in the specific seizure 
state, the prior responsiveness of the patient, and the anticipated toxicity of the drug. 
• Treatment may involve combinations of drugs, following the principle of adding known effective 
agents if the preceding drugs are not adequate in controlling seizure activity.Therapeutic 
monitoring of plasma levels and clearance in individual patients may be necessary in guiding 
dosing for optimal therapy in the individual patient. 
• Chronic therapy with ASDs is associated with specific toxic effects. Consideration of their 
pharmacokinetic properties and adverse effect profiles are important for optimizing therapy and 
avoiding toxicity and drug interactions. 
• In general, antiseizure drugs are well absorbed orally and have good bioavailability. Most 
antiseizure drugs are metabolized by hepatic enzymes, and in some cases active metabolites 
are formed. 
Summary
51
--- Page 52 ---
• Children born of mothers taking anticonvulsant drugs have an increased risk of congenital 
malformations. Fetal hydantoin syndrome has been described after phenytoin use by pregnant 
women. Carbamazepine has been implicated as a cause of craniofacial anomalies and spina 
bifida. Neural tube defects (eg, spina bifida) are associated with the use of valproic acid. 
• Sodium channel blockers preferentially bind a site within the pore of the channel when the 
channel is in the open and inactivated state.
• Phenytoin, carbamazepine, and lamotrigine are enhancers of sodium channel fast inactivation, 
meaning they stabilize and prolong the fast inactivation state, allowing the block to accumulate, 
meaning that before the channel fully recovers, the next depolarization arrives → more channels 
enter drug-bound inactivated state (the basis of use-dependent block). 
• Lacosamide selectively enhances the slow inactivation state, stabilizing the Na+ channel in a 
long-lasting (seconds) nonconductive state.
• Phenytoin, carbamazepine, lamotrigine, and lacosamide are used as monotherapy or adjuncts in 
the management of focal onset seizures and focal seizures evolving to generalized tonic-clonic 
seizures.
• Lamotrigine and lacosamide are also used as adjuncts in primary generalized seizures.
Summary
52
--- Page 53 ---
Citation: Chapter 17 Pharmacotherapy of the Epilepsies, Brunton LL, Hilal-Dandan R, Knollmann BC. Goodman & Gilman's: The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics, 13e; 
2017. Available at: https://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=2189&sectionid=170106435 Accessed: February 16, 2021
Copyright © 2021 McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved
Physiology of sodium channels: 
Closed resting state → depolarization to threshold → 
conformational change → open conducting state → Na+ influx 
→ cell depolarization, action potential propagation → fast 
inactivation (<1 millisecond) → refractory period → cell 
repolarizes to threshold voltage.
VG Na+ Channels shift to the non -conductive slow inactivation 
state during prolonged or high -frequency membrane 
depolarizations, typically lasting seconds to minutes, reducing 
available current and regulating excitability.
Summary: Mechanism of action of VG sodium channel blockers
Sodium channel blockers typically exhibit use-, state-, and 
voltage-dependent block, prolonging inactivation and 
limiting repetitive, high frequency neuronal firing. 
Phenytoin, Carbamazepine (& congeners), Lamotrigine
• Enhancers of the fast inactivation state: They 
preferentially bind a site within the pore of the channel 
when the channel is in the open and inactivated state, 
causing it to be stabilized in this state, accumulate block 
during repetitive firing, and bind more strongly at 
depolarized potentials.
Lacosamide
• Enhancer of the slow inactivation state: It selectively 
enhances the slow inactivation state, which stabilizes 
the Na+ channel in a long-lasting nonconductive state. 
• Lacosamide also enhances fast inactivation with slow 
binding/unbinding kinetics.
--- Page 54 ---
54
Summary (Part 1): Adverse effects profiles of the sodium channel blockers
Antiepileptic Drug Adverse Effects
Phenytoin
Nystagmus, diplopia, sedation, gingival hyperplasia, hirsutism, anemias, peripheral 
neuropathy, rickets/osteomalacia, SJS/TEN (HLA-B*15:02 variant)
Fetal hydantoin syndrome, induction of hepatic drug metabolism
Carbamazepine
Diplopia, cognitive dysfunction, ataxia; hyponatremia, SJS/TEN/DRESS (HLA-
B*15:02, HLA-A*31:01); rare occurrence of severe blood dyscrasias; fetal 
malformations; induces hepatic drug metabolism
Oxcarbazepine
Eslicarbazepine
As for carbamazepine, but hyponatremia is more frequent with OXC (greater 
propensity than carbamazepine and eslicarbazepine)
Induce CYP3A4 but fewer drug interactions than carbamazepine and are not 
autoinducers
Lamotrigine
Enhances fast 
inactivation state
Low incidence of sedation and cognitive side effects compared with other ASDs
Skin rash / SJS/TEN (HLA-B*15:02): Start low, Go slow: Slowly titrate dose over 6-
8 weeks to reduce severe cutaneous adverse reactions (SCARs)
Dosing guidelines for concomitant valproate or enzyme inducer
Lacosamide
Enhances slow 
inactivation state
Generally well tolerated; PR interval increase (bradycardia, AV block); (ECG 
recommended prior to start)
SJS/TEN can occur but have not been associated with HLA-B*15:02 variant.
--- Page 55 ---
Check your knowledge - Answers
55
--- Page 56 ---
56
PK Property TAKEAWAY: Relevance to Patient Care
Oral formulations having 
slow erratic absorption
Difficult to predict the effect of phenytoin base formulations between patients and in 
one patient at different times
Phenytoin IV
Fosphenytoin IV, IM
Highly alkaline solution / propylene glycol, alcohol – Slow infusion into a large vein, 
severe local irritation, closely monitor for extravasation. Avoid IM (precipitation). 
Fosphenytoin preferred – water soluble, faster infusion, safer, rarely irritating; can 
be given IM if vein not available.
Plasma protein binding
~90%
Conditions that increase free phenytoin level increase toxicity risk:
Low albumin: hypoalbuminemia, nephrotic syndrome, age (neonate / elderly)
Displacement: uremia (kidney failure)
Metabolism Hepatic CYP2C9, 2C19, 3A4
Inducer: CYP3A4, CYP2B6, CYP2C9, 2C19, UGTs, and P-glycoprotein
Clearance is not constant Zero-order kinetics, nonlinear: A small change in dose results in a disproportionately 
large change in serum concentration.
t½elimination is highly 
variable.
Metabolism follows zero-order kinetics. Elimination half -life increases with 
increasing concentration. When metabolic enzymes are saturated, a fixed amount 
of drug is metabolized per unit of time.
Check your knowledge: Fill in the column on the right.
--- Page 57 ---
Check your knowledge of adverse effects: Define the terms of the acronym
57
P P 450 and P-glycoprotein interactions
H Hirsutism
E Enlarged gums – gingival hyperplasia
N Nystagmus
Y Yellowing of skin – jaundice due to rare but serious hepatotoxicity
T Teratogenicity – Fetal hydantoin syndrome – some or all features
O Osteomalacia – induction of hepatic Vit D breakdown →  calcium uptake
I Interference with folate absorption and induction of folate breakdown
N Neuropathies – vertigo, ataxia, nystagmus; polyneuropathies with long-term use
S Skin coarsening; skin reactions; purple glove syndrome (I.V.)
CV Rapid IV administration or high dose: 
Phenytoin is a Na+ channel blocker and propylene glycol is a vasodilator and cardiac 
depressant
• Conduction abnormalities: Bradycardia, AV block, QRS widening, ventricular arrhythmias
• Vasodilation: Hypotension
--- Page 58 ---
What are the meaning and effect of “fast inactivation enhancers”?
• Physiology: In less than a millisecond after opening and conduction Na+, channels undergo a 
conformational change (gating) and enters the inactivated state (fast inactivation).
• ASDs that are fast inactivation enhancers bind a site within the pore of the channel when the 
channel is in the open and inactivated state, causing it to be stabilized in this state, accumulate 
block during repetitive firing, and bind more strongly at depolarized potentials. High frequency 
action potentials, as in seizure activity, are preferentially inhibited.
• Phenytoin, carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, eslicarbazepine, and lamotrigine
What are the meaning, mechanism, and effect of carbamazepine autoinduction?
• Carbamazepine is metabolized by CYP3A4 and it is a strong CYP3A4 inducer. 
• It induces its own metabolism – autoinduction – which stabilizes in 3 to 5 weeks of therapy.
• Therefore, the carbamazepine dose needs to be increased gradually based on seizure control, 
tolerability, and serum concentrations. 
Why is it important to screen at-risk populations for HLA-B*15:02 and HLA-A*31:01 variant alleles 
before starting carbamazepine therapy?
• Patients with HLA-B*15:02 or HLA-A*31:01 phenotypes are at risk for rash and severe 
cutaneous adverse effects – SJS/TEN and DRESS.
Check your knowledge
58
--- Page 59 ---
What are the clinical applications of carbamazepine?
• Seizure applications: focal onset seizures and focal evolving to generalized tonic-clonic 
seizures.
• Nonseizure applications: trigeminal neuralgia; bipolar disorder associate hypomania, mania, and 
depressive episodes.
Carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, and eslicarbazepine should be avoided in what seizure types? 
Why?
• CBZ, OXC, and ESL are ineffective for and may worsen absence, myoclonic, and akinetic 
seizures.
What is the mechanism of carbamazepine-induced hyponatremia?
• Nephrogenic syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH): CBZ, OXC, and ESL 
cause upregulation of AQP-2 in the distal nephron, resulting in unregulated water reabsorption, 
which leads to low serum sodium levels (dilutional hyponatremia). 
What effects in the newborn have been associated with carbamazepine use during pregnancy?
• CBZ is associated with Increased incidence of spina bifida, craniofacial defects, cardiovascular 
malformations. Other agents should be considered in patients of childbearing potential.
What are the metabolism- and transport-related drug interactions associated with carbamazepine 
use?
• CBZ is a strong inducer of CYP3A4 and induces, 2B6, 2C9, 1A2, UGT1A1, P-gp, MRP2, OATs
Check your knowledge
59
--- Page 60 ---
What are the mechanisms of action of lamotrigine and lacosamide?
• Lamotrigine: Enhances fast inactivation so recovery is slower, which leads to progressive 
reduction in available sodium channels and may inhibit the release of glutamate and aspartate.
• Lacosamide: Selectively enhances the slow inactivation state, stabilizing the Na+ channel in a 
long-lasting (seconds) nonconductive state (predominant mechanism) and binds to the fast 
inactivation state, but with slower binding/unbinding kinetics. Lacosamide preferentially prevents 
seizure activity without broadly suppressing normal brain function (physiological fast inactivation) 
→ better seizure control with fewer generalized side effects.
What is the clinical significance of the lamotrigine and lacosamide pharmacology compared with 
that of the other sodium channel blockers?
• Compared with carbamazepine, lamotrigine is effective for focal onset, focal evolving to 
generalized tonic-clonic seizures, and absence seizures with a better pharmacokinetic profile. 
Titration to therapeutic dose is slower to reduce risk of severe skin reactions.
• Lacosamide is used for focal onset, focal evolving to generalized tonic-clonic seizures, and add-
on for refractory primary generalized seizures. It has more favorable PK and adverse effect 
profiles and can be titrated more rapidly than lamotrigine.
Check your knowledge
60
--- Page 61 ---
Why does lamotrigine have specific dosing requirements when used as an add-on agent with 
valproate or phenobarbital? 
• t½ more than doubled in patients taking valproate (metabolic enzyme inhibition)
• t½ reduced in patients taking strong broad-spectrum inducer (carbamazepine, phenytoin, 
phenobarbital, primidone)
What are the lamotrigine dosing adjustments (in general)? Think about based on what you know.
• Valproate: Very slow dose titration (every other day)
• Inducers: Initiate at higher doses than when not taking and inducer.
What is the pathophysiologic basis of lamotrigine-associate skin reactions?
• The likelihood of rash and severe cutaneous adverse reactions, SJS/TEN, is increased in 
patients with the HLA-B*15:02 phenotype.
• Screen at-risk patients before starting therapy and initiate at low doses and slowly titrate based 
on response and tolerability.
Check your knowledge
61
--- Page 62 ---
Risk factors for a certain potential adverse effect of lacosamide are cardiovascular disease and 
conduction anomalies. What is the adverse effect?
• Lacosamide can cause increased PR interval leading to bradycardia and AV block.
Although lacosamide no evidence of an association with HLA-A or HLA-B variant alleles, what 
adverse effects have been reported with the use of this ASD?
• Reported hypersensitivity reactions ranging from mild skin reactions to severe cutaneous 
reactions.
What are the clinical applications of lamotrigine and lacosamide?
• Lamotrigine: Focal onset seizures, primary generalized epilepsy, generalized seizures of 
Lennox-Gestaut syndrome; prevention of major depressive episodes of bipolar disorder
• Lacosamide: focal onset seizures, focal evolving to generalized tonic-clonic seizures, add-on for 
resistant primary generalized seizures. 
Check your knowledge
62

--- Page 63 ---
Fundamental concepts: 
A drug must reach the site of action and maintain a therapeutically effective concentration at the target site 
for a long enough duration with minimal undesired side effects.
A drug should have a wide therapeutic window to allow some variability in dosing without major safety 
concerns.
A drug’s effect should correlate well with its plasma concentration for easier clinical management of the 
dose-response relationship.
• A: High, reliable bioavailability and a rate of absorption that achieves Cmax (peak concentration) 
without causing a spike in concentration that causes adverse effects.
• D: A drug should distribute to target tissues with minimal accumulation in off -target tissues (ideally) to 
minimize toxicity. Predictable free drug concentrations because of predictable protein binding. Ability to 
cross the BBB if the therapeutic effect is in the CNS; restricted ability to cross the BBB if the drug is not 
intended for CNS effects.
• M / E: A drug should exhibit predictable and consistent clearance with balanced renal and hepatic 
elimination not reliant on a single organ system, which may reduce the risk of toxic drug accumulation 
in organ impairment.
• t½: A drug should have a reasonable half-life (not too short, not too long) to maintain drug levels at 
convenient dosing intervals but short enough to avoid excessive accumulation and prolonged toxicity if 
adverse effects occur
• Drug interactions: Low potential for drug interactions by having a minimal propensity to inhibit or induce 
metabolic enzymes and transporters.
Bonus: Answer to the GRQ 
What are the hallmarks of so-called “favorable” pharmacokinetic profiles?
63
--- Page 64 ---
• Access Medicine Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine 21e, 2022; Chapter 425: Seizures 
and Epilepsy
• Access Medicine Goodman & Gilman’s Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics 14e, 2023; 
Chapter 20: Pharmacotherapy of Epilepsies
• Access Medicine Katzung’s Pharmacology Examination and Board Review, 14e, 2024; Chapter 
24: Antiseizure Drugs
• Access Medicine Katzung’s Basic & Clinical Pharmacology, 16e, 2024; Chapter 24: Antiseizure 
Drugs
• UpToDate Lexidrug monographs
• UpToDate: various topics; References and links to clinical trials are listed.
Resources:
64
--- Page 65 ---
Lecture Feedback Form:
https://comresearchdata.nyit.edu/redcap/surveys/?s=HRCY448FWYXREL4R 


--- Transcript Content ---
Welcome students to
the pharmacology of
the anti-seizure drugs.
This is the first
of two parts. We'll
begin with the
introduction, which
I think of as the big
picture, and then
we'll talk about the
frequently used sodium
channel blockers.
Please do contact me
if you'd like a helping
hand with pharmacology
or just to chat
about it and tell me
everything you know.
Here are the
learning objectives.
I put headers on it
to help you catch the
gist of each of these
learning objectives.
Things that you
really need to know
to understand
the pharmacology.
And suggestions.
I do try and help
you with learning
methods to help
you retain the
information better.
My practice
questions, of course,
are full of click
case vignettes
to help you apply
the information
and let you know
what you know well
and what you'd
like to work on.
Here are links if
you'd like to use them.
Practice questions are
all that I require.
and the core principles
of anti-seizure drug
therapy to look at. As
you wish, I recommend
that you look at the
PowerPoint printout,
the PDF, before looking
at the video to give
yourself a general sense
of what the lecture
is about and the
background information.
The core principles
of anti-seizure
drug therapy
are here and we
will begin with
our introduction.
A seizure is a
paroxysmal event due to
abnormal excessive
or synchronous
neuronal activity in
the brain. Epilepsy
is a condition in
which a person has
recurrent seizures
due to a chronic
underlying process and
the causes are very
many and diverse
infection, trauma,
neoplasm, toxic
substances,
genetic predisposition
can all be
causes of epilepsy
or seizures.
Classification and the
general classifications
are here on this
slide. Focal onset
seizures and we'll be
talking about drugs
specifically for these in
this Part 1. Focal onset
seizures arise from
excessive, high-frequency,
abnormally synchronous
neuronal activity
within a specific,
discrete, local population
of neurons in one
cerebral hemisphere.
Neuronal
hyperexcitability and
hypersynchronous activity
due to localized,
rapidly firing,
voltage-gated
sodium channels. And
that's the hallmark
of these focal
onset seizures.
Focal seizures can
also evolve into
bilateral, tonic
-clonic seizures.
primary generalized
onset seizures arise in
both hemispheres
simultaneously often
involving deep brain
structures like the thalamus
and brainstem and
widespread cortical
networks the balance
between excitation and
inhibition across both
sides of the brain is
disrupted so we have
our Focal onset seizures
are primary generalized
onset seizures and
it is essential to be
able to differentiate
these in order to
understand why certain
drugs are chosen to
treat certain seizures.
I've listed here some
primary generalized
onset seizures that
I'll briefly mention as
we go along. Now,
status epilepticus is
operationally defined
as five minutes or more
of continuous seizure
activity or two or
more discrete seizures
between which there
is incomplete recovery
or consciousness.
So we will be
talking about drugs
specifically for
the management
of status
epilepticus as well.
We always need
to know what
are the goals
of our therapy.
Whatever our
therapy is, in
this case it's
drug therapy.
So the goals of
therapy of our
anti-seizure drugs is, of
course, controlling
the seizures,
also avoiding treatment
side effects, and
maintaining or restoring
quality of life. I'm
sure you recognize
that these would be the
goals of therapy for
any type of disorder.
the therapy must be
individualized just
as true with any therapy
treat the underlying
conditions as I
mentioned before
seizure disorders can
be caused by a different
underlying conditions
and if we know
what it is and we know
that's causing the
seizure and we know
we can treat that and
that would certainly
be the first step.
To avoid precipitating
factors, preventive
therapy or maintenance
therapy for
suppression or
recurrent seizures, and
then patient
-specific issues of
addressing psychological
and social issues.
Epilepsy is a difficult
disease to live with.
And with regard to
therapy selection, the
seizure classification
and an accurate
diagnosis is essential.
As I mentioned earlier,
different drugs
are used for
different types
of seizures, so an
accurate diagnosis
must be obtained.
These drugs act in
the central nervous
system, and they
have the potential
for numerous
adverse effects,
CNS effects and
peripheral effects.
It's important
to consider
comorbid medical
conditions.
Not only hepatic
and renal disease
that we always think
about for clearance
issues, but other
organs as well.
Interactions naturally
with other medications,
and some of these
have high potential
for drug interactions
and the age and
*** of the individuals
and whether or not
the patient has any
childbearing plans.
Lifestyle, patient
preferences, and cost.
Adequate drug
exposure must be
maintained continuously
to prevent seizures.
Patient Adherence
is important.
Adjusting dosages
is important.
Frequency of dosing
is important.
Fortunately,
all but one at
therapeutic levels follow
first-order kinetics,
and we will begin with
the drug that follows
zero-order kinetics.
This is the big picture
on seizure drugs,
and what types of
seizures they treat.
I've put stars on the
drugs that you should
know by name. You
can see that it's
slightly over half of
the drugs, maybe half,
on this list. There
are approximately 25
anti-seizure drugs
available at this time.
so what is the common
thread that connects
this diverse group of
anti-seizure drugs well
to be able to interrupt
and prevent seizures
they protect by interacting
with one or more
molecular targets so
a common thread is
acting on molecular
targets in the brain to
inhibit the generation
of seizure discharges.
So how is this done?
I've indicated here
the basic ways,
which is reducing the
ability of the
neurons to fire action
potentials at a high
rate. That makes sense.
Reducing neuronal
synchronization. Inhibiting
the spread of
epileptic activity to
nearby and distant sites.
And how is that done?
by strengthening
the inhibitory side,
which is the GABAergic
interneuron activity,
or inhibiting the
excitatory side,
the glutamate
-mediated transmission.
And potassium
channels will lead to
hyperpolarization,
which is inhibition,
so stabilizing
membrane potential via
potassium channels.
That is a relatively
small approach in
terms of the number
of drugs that do this.
I'm not going
to be including
these drugs,
but I will be
talking about all
of the others.
So the three major
categories are
voltage-gated
sodium channels.
And I'll go into
that mechanism
in more detail
in this lecture.
stopping the T-type
calcium currents,
and, as I
mentioned before,
strengthening
the GABA side and
inhibiting the
glutamate side.
The most common
anti-seizure drugs
follow sodium or
calcium channel
modulation. Those are
the biggest classes.
This is just a
look at all of the
potential molecular
mechanisms of the anti
-seizure drugs. I'm
not going to go
through each and every
one. I do encourage
you to look closely
at this slide
and at all of these
various mechanisms.
I will be touching on
them. But the takeaway
for this big picture
molecular targets
is that the
mechanisms usually are
identified in controlled
in vitro studies
and then tested in
rodent seizure models.
It is not proven
that these mechanisms
contribute to anti-seizure
activity in humans.
but the drugs are
chosen based on
studies that demonstrate
the evidence of
their clinical
efficacy for specific
seizure types or
epilepsy syndromes.
So clinical efficacy
But how do we know
what they do in vitro
studies, followed
by animal models?
So we know what
the mechanisms
are in these
early studies.
And it's inferred
that these
mechanisms contribute
to the anti
-seizure activity
in humans.
We don't know that
for sure, though.
So let's take a look at
the class pharmacokinetics
and the relevance
to patient care.
When I talk about
pharmacokinetics,
it's always so you can
understand why
we need to know
pharmacokinetics
in order to
take care of
our patients.
So management of
seizure disorder
is going to be a
long-term process.
So the drugs
that are useful
should be able to
be taken ******.
Drugs that are needed
for an acute response
should be able to be
given intravenously
and should have a rapid
onset when they are.
Other routes, we
have intramuscular,
intraosseous,
intranasal, ******,
if an IV axis cannot
be obtained. So
we have lots of
ways to introduce
the drugs into the
patient's system.
A lot of them are highly
plasma protein bound.
They all distribute
to the CNS, of course,
because that's where
the site of action is.
And therefore,
they're all widely
distributed
throughout the body,
central and
systemic effects.
most of them undergo
hepatic metabolism
many of them have
active metabolite active
metabolites many
of them have a high
potential for drug drug
interactions based on
enzyme inhibition
or induction the
bioavailability is good
fortunately for all of
them really and except
for one of the One,
this good
bioavailability will
provide predictable
blood levels.
Predictable is key
because when we
start a dose or
adjust a dose, we need
to be able to expect
a certain response
based on predictable
blood levels.
Many of them, most
of them, undergo
hepatic clearance.
Some of them, and
most of them, the
metabolites will be
excreted in urine.
Some of them have
some amount of
active drug in urine.
And drug-specific
half-lives, some have
short half-lives. That
requires frequent daily
administration. Some
have longer half
-lives. And those with
the shorter half-lives
often come in extended
release versions.
so that the drug
needs to be taken less
frequently than the
immediate release.
And that can hopefully
improve patient
adherence to taking
the medication.
Pharmacogenomics.
We have some
very important
issues here.
We have a couple of
immune-related variant
alleles that we need
to remember about.
HLA-B-star-1502, this
is carbamazepine,
and it's congeners,
carbamazepine,
phenytoin and
lamotrigine.
So why is this
important? Because
individuals who have
this variant allele
have a greater
frequency of severe
cutaneous adverse
reactions. Severe
cutaneous adverse
reactions, which of
course has received
an acronym SCAR.
What are these reactions?
Stevens-Johnson Syndrome
Toxic Epidermal
Necrolysis.
We've talked
about this before,
this particular reaction.
It is severe, acute,
and life-threatening.
It affects the
skin and mucous
membranes. It's a
hypersensitivity reaction.
It is delayed.
It can occur one to four
weeks after
starting the drug.
And SJS has a mortality
of around 10% and
toxic epidermal
necrolysis of about 30%.
very, very important
adverse effects. So who
is at risk? It's
patients of various and
Asian ancestry. So the
recommendation before
starting this therapy
is for people who are
at risk to get a
screening to see if they
carry the HLA-B star
1502 variant allele.
And another one,
HLA star 3101
variant allele. This
is carbamazepine,
and its daughter,
oxcarbazepine,
or cousin, or
however you want
to think about
the related drug.
This is so
strongly associated
with DRESS, drug
reaction with
eosinophilia and
systemic symptoms.
It is what it sounds
like. It's the
various organ involvement,
the organ of the
skin and the visceral
organs. This allele
is found in, is more
widespread. It's
found in more
populations, European,
Japanese, Korean,
Chinese, South Asians.
And this is related
to carbamazepine
in particular and
oxcarbazepine.
Please do remember those.
So some big picture
adverse effects,
Toxicity potential,
the therapeutic
index for most of
the anti-epileptic
drugs, anti
-seizure drugs, is
low. And toxicity
is not uncommon.
It's common.
Withdrawal,
gradually taper,
gradually taper,
reduce the dose
gradually over time
to minimize the
potential of increased
seizure activity.
If that drug is
abruptly withdrawn,
the patient can
suffer seizures.
Suicidal ideations.
This has long
been attached to
various CNS drugs.
The anti-seizure
drugs, the
antidepressants,
the anti-psychotics.
With continued study
of this particular
adverse effect over
time, The question is
raised whether or not
these suicidal ideations,
which can exist, is
a consequence of the
drug therapy or of
the seizure disorder.
In any case,
patients, particularly
younger patients,
should be observed for
particular suicidal
ideations. Now,
pregnancy. Well, this is
a chronic condition.
Epilepsy seizure disorder
is a chronic condition,
and individuals
who become pregnant
need to be treated.
So, what drugs
are more likely
to not cause harm
to the fetus?
Because with certain
of them, there is
increased risk of
congenital malformations.
which I'll talk about
in the next slide.
So folic acid and
vitamin K supplements
are recommended for
individuals who intend
to become pregnant
and who are pregnant.
What about the
youngsters,
infants and children?
The many seizure
disorders are
seen in the
pediatric population.
So in terms of
pharmacokinetics,
they have larger
volumes of
distribution in the
neonates and infants,
and especially
young children.
And in addition, the
neonate has immature
metabolic and
elimination capabilities.
So dosing must be
done by individuals
who are neonatologists
and understand how
to dose anti-seizure
drugs neurologists.
geriatrics well the
older patient first of
all has physiologic
changes and that can
vary depending on the
age of the patient the
the status physical
status of the patient
and also comorbid
conditions most older people
have some sort of
comorbid conditions and
some people have a
number of comorbid
conditions. So now we
really do have to think
about drug interactions
because older patients
tend to be on a
number of medications.
But not only older
patients. People who have
seizure disorders
may be on one or more
anti-seizure drugs and
other types of drugs.
this chart from
up to date shows
various studies
what various studies
have found in terms
of major congenital
malformation
rates this is for
monotherapy just the
one drug at a time
first i'd like to point
out that valproate
has the has shown the
highest potential for
major malformations
valproate should be avoided
if possible sometimes
it can't be avoided
the individual is
well controlled on
valproate so that has to
be a discussion with the
patient We have
phenobarbital, also relatively
high, phenytoin,
also relatively high,
and look at these
various studies have this
big difference in the
confidence intervals,
carbamazepine and
topiramate. So I put
a box, this box with
this broken line
around it, to point
out to you the
drugs that really
should be avoided in
individuals of
childbearing potential
who are being
initiated on therapy.
If the patient is
already on these
drugs and well
-controlled, old,
then, as I said before,
you have a conversation
with the patient
about it.
Levateracetam,
lamotrigine, and
oxcarbazepine have
been shown to be
relatively okay
for patients who
are planning on
becoming pregnant.
High potential for drug
interactions.
You're going to hear
me say this a
number of times.
Inducers, the CYP3A4
and other CYPs
and UGTs and P
-glycoproteins and
organic anion
transporters and so on.
I had you memorize a
list of inducers and
now we get to apply
it to the pharmacology
of drugs we're
learning about, these
anti-seizure drugs.
So what were they?
Phenatoin, carbamazepine,
phenobarbital.
Primidone is related to
phenobarbital, and
oxcarbazepine and
eslacarbazepine are
related to carbamazepine.
Valproate is
an inhibitor.
and then many of the
other anti-seizure
drugs may be affecting
the metabolic
enzymes either by
inducing them or
inhibiting them either
weekly or moderately
in any case this is
something that you
can look up in the
drug monograph when
the time comes that
you are faced with
patients who are
taking these drugs.
I'm personally
thinking about
your clinical rotations.
So withdrawal.
Discontinuation of
anti-seizure drugs
may be considered in
adults and children
who are seizure
-free for two years
or longer. That's
a recommendation.
They need to be slowly
tapered, usually
over several
weeks, even months.
there is no data to
indicate what the optimal
tapering regimen
the neurologist will
have experience at this
with this neurologists
are the ones who use
these drugs abrupt
cessation may be
associated with a return of
seizures even a risk
of status epilepticus
some drugs are more
easily withdrawn than
others and that's going
to depend on their
half-lives on how
long the patient's
been on the drugs and
various other factors
what about physical
dependence well
we we've talked
about benzodiazepines
or have we perhaps
we haven't yet
uh tolerance
can develop to
benzodiazepines and
also to barbiturates
But we have talked
about tolerance.
So here we are now
with our voltage
-gated sodium
channel inhibitors,
which is the topic
of this part one.
I've separated it
into two groups.
Put a line down
here if you like.
The fast inactivation
enhancers.
You see that's the
majority of them.
and another one called
this one has a star
on it lycosamide
is known as a slow
inactivation enhancer
and then we have
rafinamide which i'm not
going to go into which
also stabilizes an
inactivation site
the exact mechanism
really isn't clear so
let's talk about
sodium channels a bit
First, we need to
know how they actually
work, and this little
cartoon can be helpful
in giving you the
basic idea of them.
So physiologically,
they're in a closed
resting state. They're
resting. Nothing
is flowing through
the channel. Now, when
the depolarization
hits the threshold,
the channel undergoes a
conformational change,
and it opens, and
sodium flows through.
And then, it
quickly undergoes a
gating. You see
this gating here?
This is called the
open and inactivated
state. It's open
because sodium is able
to flow into the
channel, but again, the
sodium doesn't
actually go all the way
through because of the
gate on the bottom.
It's inactivated.
And this
allows for a
refractory period.
Then the cell repolarizes
to the threshold
voltage, and it can
be activated again.
So that's the basic
idea, basic physiology.
So the drugs that
are fast inactivation
enhancers, that's
what we're talking
about here, they
inactivate this portion
here. They bind to
a site in the sodium
channel. They have
to first get inside
the cell and they bind
inside and they hold
it in this open and
activated state.
So that's causing it
to be stabilized in
this state. In other
words, to stay in
that state for a
longer period of time.
And because a number of
sodium channels
are firing,
the drug will
accumulate block during
this repetitive
firing. And that's a
good thing. And then
the drug will bind
more strongly at
depolarized potentials.
So, we have the state
-dependent block,
open and inactivated,
we have use
-dependent block during
repetitive firing,
and we have voltage
-dependent block, binds
more tightly at
depolarized potential.
So that we see
with the phenytoin,
carbamazepine, and its
congeners, and lamotrigine.
Now, licosamide
is known as a slow
inactivation enhancer
because a slow
inactivation state is
actually a mechanism
for regulating
excitability by reducing
sodium influx. So a
neuron that remains
depolarized during
this repetitive firing
or this pathologic
hyperexcitability
enters a gradual
shift to a stable non
-conducting state and
this is called slow
inactivation and it
occurs over seconds.
Compare that to less
than a millisecond
with the fast
inactivation and this will
involve a conformational
change in the pore.
So, glucosamide is a
drug that will bind
to the channel at
the slow inactivation
state and that will enhance
the slow inactivation
state, stabilize
the sodium channel
for a long-lasting
non-conductive state.
So those are the
basic ideas now about
the sodium channel
blocking action.
It's about enhancing
inactivation time.
This is how sodium
channels work. I put
it here in case you
want to get more
familiar with the
sodium channel and its
components and where
the drugs bind and
all of that. I'm not
going to go through
this with you. I'm
not going to test
you on this, but it
really is helpful
for understanding
about sodium channels.
So let's talk now
about phenytoin.
Phosphenytoin is
a prodrug. As you
can see from the
name, it's got
phosphate on it.
And we'll talk about why
that's there in
the next slide.
So So phenytoin is an
enhancer of the fast
inactivation state.
Preferentially binds
a site within the
pore of the channel
when the channel is
open and inactivated.
Stabilizes the channel in
the open and
activated state.
Accumulates block
during repetitive
firing. Binds more
strongly at depolarized
potentials, so we
have state dependent,
use dependent,
and voltage
dependent activity.
I'm not going to test
you on the structures.
It's hard to tell
from these flat
two-dimensional
structures, but in 3D space
they will fit into
the sodium channel.
Now the pharmacokinetics
of phenytoin is
really important to
understand and I've
got two whole
slides just on the
pharmacokinetics because
it is that important
for patient care. So
first of all oral,
okay good,
sodium salt or phenytoin
base and phenytoin
base simply means
that it's just
plain phenytoin. It's
not in a salt form.
In this case, phenytoin
would be in a
sodium salt.
It's actually an
acid. Phenytoin is
a weak acid, and
it's got a high pKa.
So, in solution,
well, actually,
it doesn't go
into solution.
Therefore,
it has to be formulated
together with
propylene glycol,
look at that, 40% of
the product is
propylene glycol, plus
alcohol, another 10%,
and then the whole
thing gets adjusted
to a pH of 12 in order
to keep it in
solution in an IV bag.
Additionally,
it shouldn't be
given IM because it
will precipitate in
the tissues which
is irritating and
painful and harmful.
And on top of that
it's not well absorbed.
It's not absorbed
slowly and radically.
So enter phosphenatoid.
Phosphenatoid,
they form with the
phosphate on it doesn't
need to be formulated
with poly sorry
propylene glycol
and alcohol and
adjusted it to pH it's
ready to go it can
be put into an IV bag
and it will go into
solution so it's
safer for IV use
and safer for IM use
now let's talk
about these oral
products for a
moment the base
is really erratically
absorbed it comes in
chewable tablets and
suspension so if you
think about chewable
tablets and you think
about suspension you're
probably thinking
about oh that it would
be a good way for kids
to be taking the drug
yes and that's true
unfortunately the
absorption can be very
erratic with the
phenytoin base this free
acid form just because
of the particles
of various features
you don't have to
memorize those just
remember please that it's
uh got this erratic
absorption so if you
see such a big range
of absorption then
you say to yourself
gosh i wonder how
predictable those blood
levels are now the
sodium salt which
comes in capsules is
really has really good
absorption but But
the issue now becomes,
if the patient is
getting the sodium
salt and gets switched
over to the acid or
the other way around,
the patient, for
example, learns
how to swallow
capsules and gets
switched over
to the capsules,
then there needs to
be an adjustment made
based on bioavailability.
So that's all I'm
going to say about that.
That's why we care.
Distribution.
Well, naturally,
it goes to the
brain, also liver,
muscle, fat, wide
distribution,
high plasma
protein binding,
narrow therapeutic
window,
high plasma
protein binding,
narrow therapeutic
window.
We have to think
about potential drug
interactions related
to protein binding.
Conditions that
increase free
phenytoin, free
phenytoin levels
can increase
toxicity risk.
And you will see
that this drug is
associated with
numerous toxicities.
So what can cause
an increase in free
phenytoin levels?
levels. So
hypoalbuminemia, we have
low serum albumin. So
remember, it's
highly protein bound,
mainly to albumin.
So if we don't
have as much albumin
around, we're
going to have
higher free levels.
And this can occur
in liver failure,
nephrotic syndrome,
nephrotic, nephron,
nephron, that
sounds like kidney.
And that's where
it's a kidney disease
where protein gets lost
right into the urine.
So it goes out of the
blood, low albumin,
burns because of
capillary leakage,
pregnancy because of
a larger blood volume,
age just because
certain patients
are going to have
different albumin
levels based on
neonate to elderly.
And then we have
to think about
displacement. So
uremia, this is a kidney
failure in which we
get an accumulation
of nitrogenous waste
products, which
can get carried
around on the albumin,
which can displace
then the phenytoin.
And hyperbilirubinemia,
bilirubin
travels around
on the albumin
binding sites.
And then drug
interactions, of course.
Now looking at
metabolism, I'll come
back to the recap
when I get done.
cyp2c9 that's the
certainly the majority of
the drug gets metabolized
by that enzyme
and 2c19 good
bioavailability so it's a low
hepatic extraction
ratio it goes around
and around and eventually
gets metabolized by
these iso enzymes
so the takeaway with
metabolism is that
CYP2C9 inhibitors or poor
metabolizers will have
reduced metabolism,
therefore increased
drug levels,
therefore increased
toxicity risk.
And since this
is zero-order
pharmacokinetics,
it makes dosage
adjustment a little
complicated. it.
Additionally,
phenytoin is a strong
inducer of all of
these various proteins,
CYP2C9, CYP2C19,
CYP3A4, P-glycoprotein,
UDP
-glucuronosyltransferases,
especially 1A1, which is
one of the major ones.
Now, what if
CYP2C19 is also
inhibited by some
reason or another?
80 to 90 percent, 10 to
20 percent. My goodness,
that is definitely
going to
increase the
toxicity risk.
So what do we do about
it? Well, we look.
We see what the
free phenytoin
levels are. We
can measure that.
So that will
help with dosing.
Excretion of
the glucuronide
metabolites, not
much, if any,
active phenytoin gets
excreted in the urine.
So increased
refraction may occur
in patients with
altered kidney or
liver function. We
talked about the
mechanisms on the
previous slide.
zero order kinetics.
I'm sure you
remember about
that. The half
-life is dependent
on the plasma
concentration.
As the concentration
gets above the Km
and the metabolic
processes are saturated,
the drug levels
will just keep going
up as long as the
drug keeps going in.
So half-life is dependent
on the plasma
concentration.
At zero-order
kinetics, the drug
just gets metabolized
at the rate
that the metabolic
enzymes can go.
And once it gets
significantly
below the KM,
then we will see
first-order
metabolism. This
chart here shows
the inter-individual
differences in
phenytoin metabolism.
So I'll read this part
to you. The figure
shows the relationship
between serum
phenytoin concentration
and daily dose in five
patients. One, two,
three, four, five.
Each point represents
the mean of
three to eight
separate measurements
of phenytoin at
steady state.
So what it's
showing is that
saturation points
differ between
patients. So for
this patient,
just barely into
the therapeutic
window here at
approximately 100.
And here at
approximately 150, it's
approaching the
toxicity stage. compare
this to the one
on the right hand
side where it's
just barely reaching
the therapeutic window
at about 450 450
and the toxic range
at about 575 so
you can see there's
a huge difference.
So that's making dosing
unpredictable when
initiating therapy,
when changing the dose.
Okay, here are some
clinical correlates
related to the
pharmacokinetics of phenytoin.
Loading doses,
IV or oral,
are used to
rapidly achieve
therapeutic
concentrations. Okay,
same as any loading dose.
Cautious adjustment
of subsequent doses
is recommended
because with each
subsequent dose, we
can't be sure of what
blood level will
be achieved by it.
Several weeks may be
required to reliably
assess the results
of dosing changes
because of the time
to reach steady state,
which increases as
the dose increases
because of the non
-linear kinetics.
maintenance doses
but not loading doses
should be lower in
patients with liver
failure which causes
reduced metabolism and
hypoalbuminemia makes
sense doesn't it
patients with liver
failure hypoalbuminemia
i mentioned reduced
drug metabolism
and patients with
kidney failure
we're worried about
nephrotic syndrome
which is a protein
losing syndrome
and uremia, so
the buildup of the
nitrogenous wastes
that can displace
phenytoin from the
protein binding sites.
What do we use it
for? Well, focal onset
seizures, really. That's
the only thing that
it's useful for, and
particularly the type that
are the impaired
awareness arising from the
temporal lobe. It's
very, very effective
for that. But it can
be used to treat other
focal onset seizures,
including those evolving
to the generalized
tonic-clonic seizures.
And it's useful for
status epilepticus. Now
you may recall I said
it's got a pretty slow
onset of action, including
with IV infusion.
And I'm introducing
you here, introducing
to you this idea of
continuous cardiac
monitoring with IV phenytoin.
Now, why would that
be? Well, it's a
sodium channel blocker.
And it just so happens
that phenytoin has
anti-arrhythmic
activity like lidocaine.
And in fact, it was
formerly used for
digitalis intoxication,
but it's not anymore.
it can also be used
for the prevention and
treatment of seizures
occurring during or
following neurosurgery
okay so phenytoin
is efficacious what's
the problem toxicities
and complex
pharmacokinetics limit its
use phenytoin has been
around for nearly 90
years in clinical
practice for 90 years.
And so there's great
experience with its use.
But since then,
many drugs have been
developed that are much
less complex to use.
So phenytoin,
while it still has
an important
place in therapy,
is not the first
line any longer.
Major side effects.
Gosh, look at the
side effects all over the
place hypersensitivity
so here we have
our 1502 our HLA
B star 1502 SJS TEN
fever that comes with
the severe toxicities
severe skin
toxicities folic acid
deficiency because it it
really reduces the
absorption, increases
the breakdown of
folic acid. That can
lead to megaloblastic
anemia. How do we
manage that? Folic
acid supplementation.
Vitamin D deficiency.
Why? Because of
induction of hepatic
vitamin D breakdown.
So with vitamin D
deficiency comes impaired
bone mineralization,
rickets in kids,
osteomalacia in
older patients,
weakening of the bones.
Cosmetic side
effects, well, they're
not serious and
harmful, but they're
certainly concerning
to patients.
Gingival hyperplasia,
where the
gums grow down
over the teeth.
Coarsening of
facial features,
hirsutism, body
hair growing.
And then we have our
neurotoxic effects,
the nystagmus and
double vision.
The ataxia,
which is a gait
disturbance and
slurred speech.
Sedation at
higher levels.
Generally, there's
no sedation at
the usual
therapeutic levels.
And neuropathy
with long-term use.
Distal sensory loss.
Lower extremity
areflexia.
Polyneuropathies.
Fortunately,
those are really rare.
Infusion-related side
effects. Extravization.
Purple glove syndrome.
you may notice that I
put that in lavender
to help you remember
purple glove
syndrome cardiovascular
side effects hypotension
bradycardia heart
block ventricular
tachycardia and
fibrillation let's break
this down a bit as
I said it's a sodium
channel blocker So
that can slow the
activity through the
heart, slow the beat,
slow the conduction.
And that's the point
of it as an anti
-arrhythmic. That's the
point of anti-arrhythmics.
But like all
anti-arrhythmics,
it can cause arrhythmia.
Heart block,
ventricular tachycardia,
and fibrillation.
Now, the
hypotension, where
is that coming from?
That's coming from the
propylene glycol solvent,
which is known to
be a vasodilator
and a cardiac depressant.
Phosphenatoin can
be safer to use. It
will still have these
cardiac effects.
But generally, the
drug can be given
at a somewhat more
rapid intravenous
infusion, which is
good for onset, as long
as it's at recommended
rates. I mean,
it still has to be
a slow infusion.
And it doesn't
have the propylene
glycol solvent,
so it doesn't
have that
hypotensive effect.
Some pictures of
these various adverse
effects, the
gingival hyperplasia,
Stevens-Johnson syndrome,
hirsutism, this is a
woman who's just growing
a lot of hair on
her face that she
wouldn't normally have.
purple glove syndrome.
This is obviously a left
hand. We see some edema.
Let's see the spot here
that shows pitting edema.
The purplish coloration
and there are no
blisters that we see.
And the mechanism is
not 100% clear.
This is a picture of
osteomalacia, actually
vitamin D resistant
rickets in this patient
who was receiving
phenytoin actually
I'm not sure it was a
patient receiving phenytoin
but it's certainly
vitamin D resistant
rickets this is
megaloblastic anemia
with the hyper segmented
neutrophil that is
seen this can generally
be avoided with folate
supplementation.
And now in
pregnancy, something
called the fetal
hydantoin syndrome.
Fenytoin is a hydantoin
drug chemically.
Estimated 2.4-fold
increased risk for
any major malformation
in children with
prenatal exposure
compared to controls.
And this is based
on a meta-analysis.
The specific
fetal defects,
intrauterine
growth retardation,
abnormalities
of skull and
facial features,
cleft palate,
microcephaly,
mental retardation,
and underdeveloped
nails of the fingers
and toes. That's what
you see on the lower
figure. with regard
to nursing the infant
some of the drug
will be excreted in
breast milk it's not
a huge amount but some
authorities recommend
against breastfeeding
that's a conversation
between the
neurologist and the
mother of the child
so there is a mnemonic
for phenytoin side
effects that I found on
the internet might help
you with spelling out
phenytoins and I put
cardiovascular on
the bottom because we
can't forget that and I
put the mechanism here
so I encourage you to
take a look at this
Perhaps you want to
pause the video and take
it in. It's everything
we just talked about.
So now we have some
check your knowledge.
Fill in the column
on the right. And
this is the takeaway of
these pharmacokinetic
properties. So
with regard to oral
formulations having
slow erratic absorption,
it's difficult to
protect the effect
of the phenytoin
-based formulations.
And IV?
Well, phenytoin is
a highly alkaline
solution with propylene
glycol and alcohol.
Slow infusion
into a large vein
can cause severe
local irritation,
close monitoring for
extravasation, and
it can precipitate
in an intramuscular
injection, so it
shouldn't be done.
Phosphenytoin is
preferred. It's water
-soluble, faster infusion,
safer, rarely irritating,
and it can be given
IM if necessary.
Well, what about
plasma protein binding?
Conditions that
increase free phenytoin
level, increased
toxicity risk,
low albumin,
and displacement
from protein binding.
And metabolism, we
have our CYP2C9,
2C19, a little bit of
3A4. But the important
issue here is that
the drug is an
inducer of all of
these various proteins,
strong inducer. And
if its own metabolism
is inhibited,
then the phenytoin
levels, pre-phenytoin
levels can rise.
What about clearance?
Clearance is not constant
because of zero
-order kinetics.
And it's nonlinear.
A small change in
dose results in a
disproportionately
large change in
serum concentration.
And what about the half
-life? It's variable
because of the zero
-order kinetics.
Elimination half
-life increases
with increasing
concentration.
In other words, it
takes longer to clear
that drug with the
higher concentrations.
And, when metabolic
enzymes are
saturated, a fixed
amount of drug is
metabolized per unit
of time. So, that is
the definition of
zero-order kinetics.
So, check your knowledge
with the adverse
effects. Define the
terms. So, P stands
for P450 and P
glycoprotein interactions.
H stands for hirsutism.
E stands for
enlarged gums,
or gingival hyperplasia.
N is nystagmus.
Y, yellowing of skin,
or jaundice, due
to rare but serious
hepatotoxicity. And
when there's jaundice,
there's elevated
bilirubin, which can
displace the drug
from protein binding
sites. and teratogenicity
with T, fetal
hydantoin syndrome
and osteomalacia
induction of hepatic
vitamin D breakdown,
which will decrease
calcium intake and
lead to softened bones.
I, interference
with folate
absorption and
induction of folate
breakdown and
neuropathies.
Vertigo, ataxia,
nystagmus, we've
seen nystagmus
here two times,
polyneuropathies
with long-term use.
And S,
skin, skin coarsening,
skin reactions,
purple glove syndrome,
skin reactions, we
can think about the
HLA-B star 1502 allele.
And which group?
In certain
Asian groups. And
cardiovascular,
rapid IV administration
or high dose,
phenytoin is a sodium
channel blocker, and
propylene glycol is a
vasodilator and cardiac
depressant. So
conduction abnormalities
can occur, such as
bradycardia, AV block,
QRS widening on the
EKG, ventricular
arrhythmias,
and vasodilation
will cause this
hypotension.
so we'll go through
the next group the
next three more quickly
because they they're
less complicated
although carbamazepine
has complications
of its own so these
are enhancers of fast
inactivation state
i've highlighted
carbamazepine because that's
the one with the star
on it it's important
to recognize how the
others are different,
so I put the takeaways
here at the top.
Carbamazepine is a
strong CYP3A4 inducer
and induces its own
metabolism. It also
induces a number of
other proteins, and
oxcarbazepine and
eslacarbazepine have more
favorable pharmacokinetic
profiles, and
they do not induce
their own metabolism
because they're
not metabolized by
CYP3A4. But they are
inducers of CYP3A4.
Okay, let's look
at carbamazepine.
Oral, that's good.
Mid to high protein
binding, not to the
same extent as we
see with phenytoin.
CYP3A4 metabolism.
Bioavailability
is pretty decent.
Octocarbazepine is
actually a pro-drug.
This is the active
metabolite, which is
actually S-licarbazepine.
There's no S there.
S-licarbazepine.
Oh, look at that.
That's the other drug.
So they have decent
bioavailability,
all of them.
Carbamazepine.
negligible unchanged
drug is excreted
either in the urine
or the feces and
the half-life variable
oh dear variable
half-life because
of auto induction
now that auto induction
generally occurs
over three to five
weeks and then it
plateaus so the patient
can be on a stable
dose after that time.
But in the interim,
as the enzymatic
activity increases,
the dose that is started
with will produce
lower levels as the
weeks go by. So the
dose has to be
gradually increased for
that reason. It's a
pharmacokinetic reason.
here's what else it
induces all of these
CYPs plus the UGT1A1
plus p-glycoprotein plus
this multi-resistant
protein too which is
an efflux pump
plus organic anion
transporter so just
remember high potential for
adverse effects
because of all of this
and therapeutic uses
well caramazepine
is the gold standard
if anything take this
away gold standard
first line option
for the treatment of
focal onset epilepsy
in all ages it is
highly effective plus
evidence we have to
think about evidence
how do we know it's
highly effective It
has been a comparator
in nearly all modern
trials, and it is
widely available,
affordable, and long
clinical experience.
Focal onset seizures,
focal evolving
to generalized tonic
-clonic seizures.
Just that. It's not
effective and may
increase the frequency
of these other
types of primary
generalized seizures.
Plus, it's got some non
-seizure applications,
which I'd like you
to be familiar with.
Trigeminal neuralgia.
That is the
drug that is
generally used for the
management of this
painful facial
aberration.
Trigeminal neuralgia.
Also, for
bipolar disorder.
Management of
hypomania, management of
mania, management of
the major depression
that can come with
bipolar disorder.
Carbamazepine dosing,
please be sort of
generally familiar
with this idea. I'm not
asking you to remember
the exact dosages and
time frames, but get
the idea that it is
increased gradually
based on seizure control,
tolerability, and
serum concentrations.
Seizure control,
tolerability,
and serum concentrations.
Okay, speaking
of tolerability,
well, we've got some very
important HLAs here
to think about.
HLA B1502 phenotype.
therefore certain
populations asian
populations are at
increased risk of
stevens johnson
syndrome toxic epidermal
necrolysis and hla
3101 increased risk
of all of these sjs
t en and d r e s s
hyponatremia spend a
little time on this
hyponatremia is low
levels low serum
levels of sodium. So
how does this happen?
Another acronym
for you, SIADH.
This stands
for Syndrome of
Inappropriate
Antidiuretic Hormone.
Antidiuretic hormone
is made in the
hypothalamus, is
stored in the posterior
pituitary, and it
acts in the kidney.
So what we're talking
about here, at
least as far as has
been identified as
nephrogenic syndrome
of inappropriate
antidiuretic hormone,
meaning it's at the
level of the kidney. So
how does this happen?
Carbamazepine
appears to promote
the insertion of
aquaporins, just what
it sounds like. These
are water channels
and they have a name,
AQP2, and the distal
nephron. This is
a place called the
collecting tubules.
And when those channels
are inserted, free
water gets reabsorbed.
So what is free
water? Free water
just means it's water
without solutes in
it. So that free water
gets reabsorbed and
goes into the capillary
system, into the
systemic system. So
now we have more
water flowing through
the vessels. and
that will reduce the
concentration of sodium
within the vessels.
Hyponatremia and
water intoxication,
too much water,
can occur.
Now the greatest risk is
actually with
oxcarbazepine.
Carbamazepine can
still cause it.
Look at that range.
That depends on
what studies have
been looked at.
And eslacarbazepine
can also cause
it. So all of them
can cause this
hyponatremia and it
should be monitored.
Hematological effects,
bone marrow suppression,
so decreased
synthesis of red and
white cells and platelets,
and proliferative
effects, just
to be confusing.
And the mechanism is
not known. Fortunately,
it doesn't happen
often. It is reversible.
So bottom line,
you just have
to watch for
it. Pregnancy.
Increased
incidence of spina
bifida, craniofacial
defects,
cardiovascular
malformations.
Other agents should
be considered in
patients of
childbearing potential.
Oxcarbazapine doesn't
seem to cause those
effects to the same degree.
It can be considered
during pregnancy.
It is effective for
focal onset seizures.
and the eslacarbazepine
we just don't know
yet there's not enough
data to tell us drug
interactions high
risk numerous what else
i don't need to say
more about that you
should know the mechanisms
of these drug
interactions mechanisms
mechanisms mechanisms
so more pictures on the
left we see stevens
johnson syndrome and on
the right is toxic
epidermal necrolysis
which is just really
an extension of more
serious adverse effects
that extend from SJS.
So check your knowledge.
What are the
meaning and effect
of fast inactivation
enhancers?
Well, physiology of
the sodium channel
is that in less than
a millisecond after
opening and sodium
conduction, the
channel undergoes a
conformational change
with gating that
enters the inactivated
state. So, open and
inactivated, and
that's fast inactivation,
and these drugs
enhance that effect,
stabilizing the
channel in the open
and inactivated state,
and they cause
accumulation during the
repetitive firing
and they bind more
strongly at
depolarized potentials.
So, high frequency
action potentials
are preferentially
inhibited.
Well, preferential
to what?
Well, preferential
to the normal
activation, which
is much slower.
What are the
meaning, mechanism,
and effect? of
carbamazepine
auto induction.
Now it's so easy.
It's metabolized by
CYP3A4. It's a strong
CYP3A4 inducer and
so it induces its
own metabolism which
occurs generally
over three to five
weeks of therapy and
then it will plateau
and at that point
the patient can be
on a stable dose.
And what is the
importance of these HLAs?
HLA-B-1502 and HLAA
-3101 phenotypes
are at risk for rash and
severe cutaneous
adverse effects.
What are the
clinical applications
of carbamazepine?
Well, focal
onset seizures,
focal evolving to
generalized tonic
-clonic seizures,
trigeminal neuralgia,
bipolar disorder,
and carbamazepine,
oxcarbazepine,
eslacarbazepine
should be avoided
in what seizure
types and why?
they are ineffective
for the other types and
on top of it they
can worsen absence my
absence or absence
myoclonic and akinetic
seizures and hyponatremia
how does that happen
nephrogenic siadh
these drugs can cause
up regulation or
increased insertion of
these aquaporin type
2 channels into the
distal nephron,
into the collecting
tubules, resulting in
unregulated free water
reabsorption, which
leads to low serum
sodium levels. And
this is a delusional
hyponatremia. What
effects in the
newborn have been
associated with
carbamazepine use
during pregnancy.
Increased
incidence of spina
bifida, craniofacial
defects,
cardiovascular
malformations.
Other agents should be
considered in patients
of childbearing
potential, if possible.
And drug interactions?
Well, it is a strong
inducer of CYP3A4,
2B6, 2C9, 1A2, UGT1A1,
p-glycoprotein,
organic anion
transporters, and so on.
So lamotrigine now,
another enhancer
of fast inactivation
state, plus
it seems to have,
there is evidence
that it has other
mechanisms as well
by inhibiting the
release of glutamate, the
excitatory neurotransmitter,
and aspartate,
which is another excitatory
neurotransmitter,
certainly not as
prevalent as glutamate.
Let's look at the
pharmacokinetics.
This is what you call a
favorable
pharmacokinetic profile.
It's oral, various dosage
forms, so
infants, children,
adults.
Protein binding is
really moderate. it.
Hepatoglucuronidation for
metabolism,
that's about it.
Bioavailability
is 98%. That's for
the immediate
release. And that
is when there are
no other drugs
that are affecting
those enzymes.
And it's excreted
in the urine
as glucuronide
metabolites.
Very little free
drug, if any.
Half-life, really
nice half-life,
24 hours.
Now, I put in red these
concepts you
must remember.
Valproate, you recall,
is an inhibitor of
CYPs of various
enzymes, including UDP
-glucuronacil transferase,
and therefore the half
-life is more than
doubled in patients who
are taking valproate.
So if lamotrigine, which
is frequently used as
an add-on, is given
to patients with
valproate, it really needs
to be slowly, slowly
titrated up. And we'll
talk about why it has
to be so slow, much
slower than the other
anti-seizure drugs.
Now in patients
who are taking an
inducer, the half
-life will be reduced.
And if the patient has
liver insufficiency,
the half-life is
going to be increased.
This all makes sense.
I know you understand
this from your basic
pharmacokinetic
principles that you
learned last term.
Fortunately, there are
color-coded starter
kits available to
help patients to keep
their medication
schedule straight when
they are being initiated
on these drugs.
Oops,
didn't mean to move on.
Therapeutic uses.
Well, this is a
sodium channel
blocker, a fast
activation enhancer.
But recall that
it also has other
activities. So
lamotrigine is actually a
broad spectrum anti
-seizure drug. So
it's effective for
focal onset seizures,
and it's effective
for certain primary
generalized tonic
-clonic seizures.
Effective for
something called
Lennox-Gastaut
syndrome, which is a
childhood epilepsy
encephalopathy.
And for absence
seizures, second
line. First line,
ethosuximide,
valproate if
necessary, and then
lamotrigine if
still necessary.
Non-seizure uses,
bipolar disorder.
However,
it's only for preventing
major depressive
episodes. It's not
really useful for mania,
for preventing mania.
and it needs to be so
slowly introduced, so
slowly titrated, it
cannot be used for
acute bipolar episodes.
Side effects, really it's
pretty well tolerated,
especially compared
to phenytoin. You
get some nausea,
dizziness, drowsiness.
Low incidence
of sedation, it
can occur in
certain patients.
Low incidence of
cognitive side
effects, although
they can occur.
But it can worsen
migraine headaches,
so people who
get migraines
perhaps shouldn't
get lamotardine.
And serious
hypersensitivity
reactions. Here
we have our HLA-B
star 1502 variant
allele again.
and this is what I
absolutely, positively
want to impress on you
that you need to know.
To reduce the
risk of rash,
the drug should
be slowly titrated
over 6 to 8 weeks,
even more cautiously
if added to
valproic acid. Why?
Why? Because valproate
is an inhibitor
of the metabolism
of lamotrigine.
And in fact, the
recommendation is
even lower dose
and every other day
on initiation rather
than every day.
Cosamide now
enhances the slow
inactivation state.
So this one has a
slightly different
mechanism of action.
Yes, it's a sodium
channel blocker.
The slow inactivation
state occurs later
when there has been
pathologic activity
in the sodium channel.
It will slowly
transition over to
this slow inactivation
state, which is a
protective mechanism.
So, licosamide
will actually
stabilize this state.
So it produces a long
-lasting non-conductive
state. And this
appears to be, anyway,
the predominant mechanism
of action of licosamide.
Licosamide also
seems to enhance the
fast inactivation
state. This Mexicanism
has been suggested in
more recent studies.
However, the drug
has what's called
slower binding and
unbinding kinetics.
So it's not exactly
the same as the other
ones we saw. Well,
what's the effect?
It preferentially targets
the pathologically
overactive neurons,
preventing repetitive
firing during
sustained birth without
broadly suppressing
normal brain function.
So it appears to
produce better seizure
control with fewer
generalized side effects.
This drug has
come to the market
more recently, certainly
than phenytoin,
carbamazepine,
and lamotrigine.
Again, really favorable
pharmacokinetics,
oral, IV, minimal
protein binding, hepatic
metabolism with minor
CYP involvement, in
active metabolites, 100
% oral bioavailability,
excreted in urine,
about 40% unchanged,
and the half-life is
approximately 13 hours,
which is pretty good,
twice daily dosing.
It's used for focal
onset and also
primary generalized
onset seizures, mainly
add-on for these,
but it can used as
monotherapy or add
-on for focal onset.
Off-label,
it's being used
occasionally for
status epilepticus.
We do have other
drugs for that.
The benzodiazepines,
which we'll talk
about in the next
lecture, are first line.
Fenytoin,
levotiracetam, and
licosamide are all
potential second agents
adverse effect generally
well tolerated commonly
dizziness drowsiness
cns of course
headache the gait
disturbance ataxia
confusion etc but generally
better tolerated than
say phenytoin pr this
is something different
unique feature pr
interval increase
bradycardia and AV block.
So it's recommended
the patient have an
ECG before starting
this drug to get a
baseline look at their
cardiac function.
Individuals who have
cardiac problems
probably should
avoid this drug, and
there are certainly
other options.
Hypersensitivity
reactions can occur.
SJS and TEN and DRESS
rarely have been
reported, but there
is no evidence of this
HLA-B 1502 variant
allele involvement.
The usual suicidal
ideations and tendencies
have been reported
and associated with
licosamide and drug
interactions, mainly the
CNS effects. We don't
see much in the way
of pharmacokinetic
interactions. So it certainly
seems like easier
to use drug anyway.
So let's take a quick
check on the knowledge.
Mechanisms of action
of lamotrigine
and licosamide are
fast inactivation
enhancer
lamotrigine, slow
inactivation state
enhancer licosamide.
The clinical
significance.
Compared with
carbamazepine, lamotrigine
is effective
for focal onset,
focal evolving to
generalized tonic
-clonic seizures,
and absence seizures
with a better
pharmacokinetic profile.
Titration to therapeutic
dose is slow to
reduce the risk of
severe skin reactions.
Licosamide is used
for focal onset,
focal evolving to
generalized tonic-clonic
seizures, add-on
for refractory
primary generalized
seizures, more favorable
pharmacokinetics
again, adverse
effect profiles
better, and it can be
titrated more rapidly
than lamotrigine.
Why does lamotrigine
have specific dose
requirements when
used as an add-on
agent with valproate
or phenobarbital.
The half-life is
more than doubled
in patients taking
valproate, whereas
when taken with
a strong inducer,
the half-life is reduced.
And this broad
spectrum, meaning it
induces a lot of
proteins. That's what the
broad spectrum means
here. and what are
the lamotrigine
dosing adjustments in
general well valproate
very slow dose
titration it's always
slow but this is even
slower and inducers
initiate at higher
doses but still slow
titration and fortunately
there are kits
color-coded kits
available to help
patients with adherence.
And the physiological
basis of the skin
reactions is HLA
-B1502 for lamotrigine,
and these
patients should be
screened before
starting therapy.
Risk factors for
cardiovascular
adverse effects
of licosamide
is increased PR
interval leading to
bradycardia and AV
block, and I pointed
out this PR interval
on the EKG here.
Skin reactions can occur,
but they're
not associated
with these HLA
variant alleles.
And clinical
applications of the two
drugs, lamotrigine
focal onset, primary
generalized
epilepsy, generalized
seizure, like Lennox
-Gastaut syndrome,
prevention of major
depressive orders and
bipolar, licosamide,
focal onset seizures,
evolving to generalized,
and add-on for
resistant primary
generalized seizures.
So that brings us to
the end. In the interest
of time, I'm not
going to go through
the summary I invite
you to look at it on
the PowerPoint PDF and
I have included the
mechanism here again
and some adverse
effects and the check
your knowledge answers
concludes part one of the
lecture on anti
-seizure drugs

