In this lecture, we're going to be talking about very general aspects of the musculoskeletal system. In part one, I'm just going to give you a basic introduction to the lecture, and then we're going to talk about bones. Before we get into the content of this lecture, I thought it would be valuable to go over what you should expect to learn about the gross anatomy of the musculoskeletal system. The musculoskeletal system makes up a very large component of the body in terms of its volume and mass. It consists of your limbs, the spine and back muscles, and your body wall, and the skull and muscles of the head. There are many, many individual structures in the musculoskeletal system that you should expect to know. Parts of the musculoskeletal system include bones, cartilage, muscles, and other connected tissues such as ligaments and fascia. In lectures you will receive on the gross anatomy of components of the musculoskeletal system, there is no way to go over all of the individual structures. Therefore, you should study these in the anatomy lab and on your own. In addition to studying and recognizing the individual structures, you should focus on their connections. In particular, focus on the bony attachments of muscles and how this affects what actions the muscles cause. And obviously, you should be focusing on joints, what movements they allow and what movements they restrict. Finally, you should carefully study how the musculoskeletal system interfaces with the remainder of the body. This occurs primarily via nerves and vasculature. As you study the musculoskeletal system, one of your major focuses should be on the nerves that innervate the muscles and the main arteries and veins that transport blood to and from different parts of the musculoskeletal system. As you will see in later lectures, an understanding of muscle attachments and actions, the innervations of muscles and the potential motions allowed by joints are a major part of the clinical diagnosis of musculoskeletal injuries and pathologies. Here are the session objectives for this lecture. We will briefly discuss the growth, development, and morphology of skeletal tissue. We're going to go over the main types of synovial joints based on types of motion. We're going to briefly touch upon types of cartilage in their distribution and the different types of muscle contractions and how they contribute to motion in the body. Note the final objective about muscle contractions is typically the most difficult for many students to understand. If you have trouble with this objective, do not hesitate to contact me and I will help you out. Once you get it, it will seem very simple. Now for some basics about the skeleton. The skeleton consists of two parts. The axial skeleton, which is brown in this figure, consists of the skull, spine, and the ribs. The appendicular skeleton is represented in green and is the limbs, including the pectoral and pelvic girdles. Bones of the skeleton can be categorized in one way by their shape. For instance, bones such as the femur and the thigh are long and slender and are called long bones. While we think of long bones such as the femur as an individual bone, it really has many parts that develop separately and fuse together into a single element. These parts include the diaphysis, which is the shaft, and the epiphyses, which are the articular ends. We will discuss the development of a long one later, a little later. Short bones are small and blocky. Most are found in your hand. You have encountered this, they're most found in your hand. The word manis, which you may have encountered before, is a Latin term for hand. And you've heard this word before, such as in the word manuscript, which means handwritten, or manual labor, which means work with the hands. The Latin term for foot, which is pez, is used less frequently, but you'll encounter that word as well. It's derived from the Latin word petal. Many of the bones in the skull and other bones, such as the scapula, are flat bones. Then you have a lot of miscellaneous bones with irregular shapes, such as your vertebra. Finally, there are numerous bones embedded in tendons. Your patella, otherwise known as your kneecap, is the largest example of one of these. these are called sesamoid bones and then finally as you will see in later slides the shapes of the bones has a lot to do with the different ways that they actually develop all bones even flat bones are composed of basically two types of bones all bones are surrounded by a dense solid superficial layer of compact bone this compact bone can also be called cortical bone deep to the compact bone the cavity within is filled by a very porous spongy bone depending on the mechanical loads of the bone the compact bone can be very thick or thin and it can vary consider considerably along the length of the bone even very thin flat bones such as the scapula have thin layers of both compact and spongy bone as I noted earlier the shapes of bones are strongly related to how they develop embryologically. So bones are derived from two basic processes. The first of these is intramembranous bone. These bones ossify directly from or within membranes formed by an embryological connective tissue known as mesenchyme. Consequently, they are flat and membrane -shaped. Typical examples of intramembranous bone would be the bones of your brain cake, such as your patella or your temporal bone. The second type of bones are endochondral bones. They ultimately are derived by mesenchyme also, but they start out being preformed by cartilage, which gradually ossifies into bone as the person becomes an adult. Long bones are typical examples of endochondral bone. Other examples of endochondral bone are like what you see here on the bottom right, the blocky bones in your manis and pez, the carpals and the tarsals. As a general rule, any bone that takes place in a synovial joint is going to be endochondral. It's important to realize that bones consist of many parts that develop separately and fuse together into a single bone. Therefore, bones can have intramembranous and endochondral parts in the same bone. The scapula is a good example. The flat body is intramembranous, but several parts along the margins are endochondral, and these are shown in blue. Note the glenoid cavity, which takes part in the shoulder joint and articulates with the humerus, is clearly part of a synovial joint, that of the shoulder joint, and it is an endochondral part of the scapula. All bones are covered by a thin membrane known as periosteum. You won't study periosteum closely in gross anatomy, but it is there nonetheless, and it's very important to bone biology, so you should know about it. The articular surfaces of bones are the only surfaces that are not covered by periosteum. All other bone surfaces are covered by periosteum. Periosteum is vascularized, so it provides nutrients to the outer layers of the bone. And then osteoprogenitor cells in the periosteum deposit bone and enable bone growth. Periosteum is involved in how tendons and ligaments attach to bone. And periosteum is richly innervated with sensory nerves. and much of the intense somatic pain that, for example, would be associated with a broken bone is related to damage to the periosteum. I mentioned that the blood is applied to the superficial layers of bone as through the periosteum. Deep layers are supplied by arteries that pierce the bone and run more deeply into it. The openings for these blood vessels are called nutrient foramina. Nutrient foramina are macroscopic and can readily be seen when you study dry bones. By the way, every ossification center of a bone needs at least one nutrient foramen, so bones that are composed of several fused elements have multiple nutrient foramina. Long bones are the largest bones in your body, and their growth is important for physical attributes such as body height and body proportions. It's therefore important to have a basic understanding of how long bones grow. In this sequence of the humerus, starting on the left, the bone begins as a cartilage model derived from mesenchyme. As we move to the right, the shaft of the bone, which as I said before is called the diaphesus, begins to ossify first, and the epiphyses, which are the ends of the bones, lag behind. Notice in figure four in the middle of the slide that the epiphyses may actually have multiple centers of ossification. As the majority of the bone becomes ossified in figure five, lengthwise growth of the diaphesus continues in the cartilaginous space between the diaphysis and the epiphysis. So that would be here and here. This is the region where lengthwise growth continues, and this is called the epiphyseal plate. A bone fracture involving the epiphyseal plate in a subadult is potentially serious, as damage to the epiphyseal plate can cause interruption of lengthwise growth of the bone. Figure 6 on the right is an adult bone. The epiphyseal plate is fully ossified. At this point, lengthwise growth of the bone is no longer possible, and the lengths of the bones and, for example, your body height have become fixed. In an x-ray of an adult, an epiphyseal line is sometimes still visible right here and distally right here, where the diaphysis and the epiphysis are fused together. Here's an example of the x-rays of the limbs of a neonate. As you can see, large parts of the skeleton are not visible as they are still unossified. The carpals and tarsals are mostly unossified. The diaphyses of most long bones are present, but the epiphyses are largely unossified. It is therefore difficult to examine the joints because they are mostly cartilaginous at this point. In the next slide, we have an example of an 8 -year-old hand x -ray compared to that of an adult. For many of the finger bones, the diaphyses and epiphyses are distinctly different bones. The carpels are also still only partially ossified. The skeleton of juveniles is very different from that of adults, as you can see. not only in its appearance, but in its material properties because it contains much more cartilage. Any area of pediatric medicine that concerns itself with growth and development of children will require a very good understanding of the ontogeny of the skeleton. However, we will not study juvenile osteology in detail here. Nonetheless, you should be able to recognize the various parts of a long bone in a pediatric x-ray. as you study bones you will notice that they do not have regular smooth surfaces bones have irregular surfaces with what at first appear to be seemingly randomly distributed bumps rough areas concavities and protuberances these surface features are the attachment sites of tendons ligaments and other structures that attach to bone make sure you study the surface anatomy of bones as you will be required to be familiar with many of these features Any anatomy textbook should have a basic table with the terminology of surface bone anatomy. In part two of this lecture, we will go over some basics about cartilage and its distribution in the body, and we will cover the different types of joints, and more specifically, talk about synovial joints and how they can be classified according to their potential movements. There are three types of cartilages. cartilages. These three types have different histologies, and this relates directly to their different material properties. Hyaline cartilage is the most common type of cartilage. It is semi-flexible, and here on the left you can see the histology of hyaline cartilage. It consists of chondrocytes in a homogenous matrix. Fiber cartilage on the top right is a much tougher, more rigid type of cartilage. It contains fibers visible in the cartilage matrix that make it much stronger and tougher than hyaline cartilage. Finally, on the lower right is an example of elastic cartilage. It contains bundles of elastin, which are stained purple here, and gives this type of cartilage extreme flexibility. Elastic cartilage resists being damaged by being extremely compliant. However, it has very little strength or rigidity, and so it is not a strong material. This figure highlights the distribution of the three types of cartilage. You should study the distribution of cartilages and be able to recognize which of the three types of cartilage a particular cartilaginous structure is made of. Highline cartilage shown in blue is the most common. Endochondral bone begins as highline cartilage before it ossifies and becomes fully ossified bones in adults. In an adult skeleton, highline cartilage is located in synovial joints, costal cartilages, and the cartilages in the pharynx and bronchial tree. Elastic cartilages, shown in green, are the flimsy cartilages, such as the oracle of the ear. And finally, fibrocartilages, which are in red, form the vertebral discs in the spine and also some other specialized cartilages, such as the menisci in the knee and the ***** symphysis. As you study musculoskeletal anatomy, joints are obviously a focal point. Joints are areas where musculoskeletal structures are joined in complex ways to permit and restrict motion. Joint injuries and joint degeneration are significant concerns in medicine. Joints consist of many parts, including the proximal and distal ends of the bones, the articular cartilages, and other cartilaginous structures in the joints, such as the fibrocartilaginous menisci in the knee. Joints are held together by ligaments, as you can see in the top right figure, but also by muscles that cross these joints, which are not pictured here. The strength, mobility, and motions permitted by a joint are determined by several variables. These include the shapes of the articular surfaces, which determine which directions the joint can move. The ligaments determine how much a joint can bend in some directions and prevent excess movements beyond that range. And in other directions, ligaments completely prevent movement. Muscles move the joints, but they also act as dynamic ligaments and also determine how much a joint can bend and prevent excess movements beyond that range. Joints have complex vasculature. Anastomoses, which you will study in detail later, are basically redundant blood supplies. The same Joint tissues can be supplied by numerous arteries, which assure that blood moves to the joint and to the tissues beyond the joint, no matter what position the joint is in. Basically anastomoses around joints prevent a highly flexed joint from cutting off blood supply to itself and distal body parts. Finally, joint structures are richly innervated. The tendons and ligaments are highly sensitive to the tension being exerted upon them. This contributes to something called proprioception, which is the ability of a person to sense what position their body parts are in. Proprioception is an important sense as it contributes to motor abilities, such as touching your nose with your eyes, typing without looking at your fingers, or walking up and down stairs without looking at your feet. There's an easy shortcut to understand which nerves innervate which joints. It's known as Hilton's Law. John Hilton is a famous British surgeon who first noted what we now call Hilton's Law. Hilton's Law says that the nerve supplying the muscles extending directly across and acting at a given joint not only supplies the muscle, but also innervates the joint and the skin overlying the muscle. Since you will be studying the attachments, innervations, and actions of muscles, you will be able to use that knowledge to infer which nerves contribute to the innervation of associated joint structures. So, no need to memorize. There are three types of joints in the body. We have already discussed synovial joints a little. They are the most common joint in the body and are capable of the most movement and the most diverse kinds of movement. All synovial joints are enclosed in a synovial capsule, which is filled with a lubricant called synovial fluid, and the articular surfaces of the bones are capped with articular cartilages. We will study synovial joints in more detail. On the upper right, fibrous joints are the sutures in the skull. These are immobile or minimally mobile. Syndysmosis are a type of fibrous joint that has the potential for more motion. The example here is the interosseous membrane between the ulna and radius in the forearm, which allows the radius to rotate about the ulna. The lower right shows two types of cartilaginous joints. Primary cartilaginous joints, which are also called synchondroses, are the joints between the diaphyses and the epiphyses of long bones. Primary cartilaginous joints are not mobile. These bones fuse with age, and primary cartilaginous joints are not present in adults. On the other hand, secondary cartilaginous joints do persist in adults. The most common examples of cartilaginous joints are the vertebral discs, which allow limited motion. You will receive an entire lecture on the anatomy of synovial joints, so we will not cover that here. However, you should be familiar with the basic components of a synovial joint, including the joint capsule, which surrounds and seals the synovial capsule, the synovial membrane, which secretes synovial fluid, and the articular cartilage on the proximal and distal ends of the bone. And now let's move on to joint motion. If you're not familiar with the different types of motions, please review them using this figure or some other resources. One helpful aspect of the musculoskeletal system is that you can use your own body as a cheat sheet to help you study and understand the motions of each joint. There is no harm in moving a joint or palpating part of your musculoskeletal system during a test. Most of the musculoskeletal system is observable through its motions, surface anatomy, and palpation. As you study the musculoskeletal system, study the anatomy of your own body through these means because with practice, it will become your most useful study guide and reference. You are naturally already familiar with the flexion and extension capabilities of most joints, but there are aspects of motion that you may not have ever recognized. As an example, try and evaluate the ability of the knee joint to rotate. Can the knee rotate? Are there a limited number of positions during which this is possible? Tenovial joints can be classified by the types of motions they allow. In this example, there is at least one of each type of joint. I've arranged them on the left in order from the least mobile plane joint to the most mobile ball and socket joint. Plane joints are capable of some small amounts of gliding and sliding. Most other joint types are highly mobile in some directions, but not others. For example, hinge joints can flex and extend, but cannot abduct, adduct, rotate, or circumduct. The most mobile joint is the ball and socket joint, which is capable of flexion, extension, abduction, adduction, rotation, and circumduction. The knee, which we mentioned earlier, is a special kind of joint called a trochoginglimus, meaning that it can flex and extend, and also rotate about an axis. Again, you can discover the motions of joints by examining yourself. No need to memorize. Try to deduce what motions the metacarpophalangeal joints are capable of. In Part 3 of this lecture, we will cover muscles and the different types of muscle contractions. It is pointless to know the name and anatomical location of a muscle without knowing its associated detachments and the primary action that the muscle produces when it contracts. Secondly, it is important to have familiarity with the innervations of muscles, as the evaluation of muscle function and muscle impairments is a means of diagnosing neurological injuries and disorders. There are some convenient shortcuts to learning the innervations of muscles of the limbs, which will actually make this quite easy. We will cover these shortcuts in subsequent lectures. Please note that a muscle name includes its bellies and its tendons. So when I refer to, for instance, the biceps brachii, I am referring to its long and short heads and its proximal and distal tendons. You should be able to recognize and know the names of the individual bellies of major muscles that have multiple bellies or heads. For example, as I mentioned, the biceps brachi has two bellies, the long and short. They have different attachments and cause non-identical sets of actions. The name of the muscle sometimes offers major clues to some aspect of its anatomy. For instance, the adductor pollicis reveals that the muscle adducts the thumb. This is a helpful shortcut for remembering or deducing muscle actions. Generally speaking, the term contraction in physiology refers to a shortening or tensing of an organ, especially muscles. However, this is a poor and erroneous definition in reference to muscles and often causes confusion about what a muscle contraction really is. When we study muscles and muscle function, please strike any concept of shortening or decreasing length from your understanding of the term contraction. A muscle contraction is the activation of muscle fibers resulting in the generation of tension. Nothing other than the generation of tension is required for a muscle contraction to occur. While we might think of a muscle contraction as leading to a shortening of the muscle, this is not always the case. A length change, either shortening or elongating, may occur, but it is not required during a muscle contraction. For example, you may attempt to lift a weight. If the weight is too heavy to lift, a muscle contraction will have taken place, but if no movement has taken place, the muscle has not shortened. Having cleared that up, let's now look at what the action of a muscle is. When you read anatomy textbooks, muscles are described as having actions. The action of a muscle is what happens when the muscle contracts without resistance and it produces a movement. To use the biceps brakii example again, when it contracts without resistance, it causes the elbow to flex. The action of the triceps brakii, on the other hand, when it contracts with no resistance, causes the elbow to extend. However, in real life, muscles do not work in isolation and without resistance. The biceps and the triceps are antagonists. In other words, they move the elbow in the opposite directions and if they contract at the same time will work against one another. There are also external forces that muscles must both combat and cooperate with, such as the force of gravity pulling on the body, gravity pulling on other objects that someone may be attempting to interact with, or the resistance of another person, such as a wrestling opponent. Consequently, as you will see, muscles do not always shorten when they contract, and they do not always produce their textbook actions. Walking down stairs is a classic example of muscles counteracting gravity using eccentric contractions of the quadriceps muscles. So at this point, let's go over the major types of muscle contractions. On the left, Arnold Schwarzenegger is just standing there, not moving, but his muscles are in a state of tonus. Tonus is the condition of your muscles constantly being in an involuntary state of minor contraction. Tonus is involuntary and always occurs, although it diminishes during REM sleep. We will not discuss tonic contractions further. In the middle photo, Arnold is demonstrating an isometric contraction. The flexors of his elbow, including his biceps brachii, and the extensor, the triceps brachii, are contracting in equilibrium and holding his elbow in an unmoving state of stasis. As long as his elbow is in the same position, the muscles do not change length, although they are still contracting, so during an isometric contraction, the length of the muscles do not change. In the right photo, Arnold is working out with a weight machine. His elbow is going through cycles of extending and flexing, and the extensor muscles in his arm are changing length with each contraction. These are isotonic contractions. There are further two types of isotonic contractions. Concentric contractions are where the muscles shorten, and eccentric contractions are where the muscle elongates. It sounds highly counterintuitive that a muscle can elongate while it contracts because a muscle can only pull in one direction. It cannot push. But I hope to explain this in further slides. In this scenario, a weightlifter is lifting and lowering a weight. weight. This exercise involves repeated flexion and extension of the elbow against a constant extrinsic force, in this case the pull of gravity on the weight, which continually pulls downward a constant amount. Even though the elbow is both flexing and extending in this exercise, bodybuilders are well aware that the exercise works the biceps brachi but does absolutely nothing for the triceps. The triceps does nothing here, while the biceps controls both the up and down movement of the weight. How can it be that the biceps brakii and other flexor muscles of the elbow control both flexion and extension and the triceps brakii plays no role? In phase one of this exercise, the biceps brakii and other flexor muscles of the elbow contract. The contraction is sufficiently powerful to overcome the force of gravity on the weight. The flexor muscles shorten and the weight is lifted. This is a concentric contraction. In phase two, the weight must be lowered at a slow, controlled rate. The gravitational pull on the weight can extend the arm without muscular input. The triceps is therefore not needed to extend the arm in this situation. As noted, the weight must be lowered slowly. Moreover, the triceps can offer no assistance in slowing the rate that the arm is extended since it can only work in the same direction as the weight itself. You might conclude that the flexor muscles of the arm must relax to lower the weight. But this is not the case. If the flexor muscles relaxed, the weight would fall suddenly and rapidly. Again, the weight must be lowered slowly. The flexor muscles must continue to contract, but with a force that is slightly less than the gravitational pull of the weight. In this scenario, the weight is slowly lowered and the elbow is extended. due to the controlled resistance of the flexor muscles, which included the biceps brachi. The muscle is activated, but the weight is forcing it to be elongated. This is an eccentric contraction. This is easy to understand if you compare it to a tug-of-war. Muscles are continuously in a tug -of-war battle with opposing forces. Gravity is a constant opposing force. In a tug-of-war battle with gravity, in this scenario the muscle overpowers gravity. The muscle shortens and the muscle wins. During an eccentric contraction, gravity and muscles are opposing one another, but in this case gravity is more powerful. Gravity pulls the muscle with a force that exceeds the force of the contraction. In some cases, the force may simply be more powerful than the full potential of the muscle to resist. However, in most circumstances, the muscle is allowing gravity to win on purpose by exerting a contractile force against gravity that controls the rate of movement in the direction that is opposite of the primary action of the muscle. An eccentric contraction always involves movement in the direction that is in the opposite of the primary action of the muscle. So, for example, if a concentric contraction of a particular muscle causes flexion of a joint, An eccentric contraction of the same muscle will always involve extension of the same joint. Because gravity is a constant force, day -to-day movement of the human body will always involve a complex mixture of concentric and eccentric contractions. As you study muscles and their primary actions, it would be a good idea to explore how use of those muscles might involve concentric and eccentric contractions. So, for instance, you might ask yourself what exercise could one do that involves both flexion and extension of the elbow with contractions of the biceps, of the triceps brachi. So a push-up is a good example of another simple exercise that uses the triceps brachi that involves a mixture of concentric and eccentric contractions of the triceps brachi. On your own time, consider the position of the elbow during the up phase and down phase of a push-up. What kinds of contractions of the triceps brachii were involved to reach each point? It's easiest to remember that an eccentric contraction is always the opposite movement of the primary action of the muscle.