Hello, everyone. Welcome to my lecture, the spinal cord. In this hour, we are going to describe the physical geometry of the spinal cord, especially the different gray and white matter divisions, including nuclei and lung tracts, as well as spinal reflex. The goal is you should be able to identify different levels of the spinal cord based on the neurological deficits. Be sure to look at the detailed objectives in the CPG as well as scholar Rx bricks. I have mapped this lecture concepts into the complex blueprint. You can see here the complex blueprint has dimensions and clinical presentations. So both clinical presentation four and five has a very relevant spinal cord information. We also mapped it to USMLE blueprint and you can see here with the nervous system and special senses there are normal process as well as abnormal processes. So these are highly relevant to the spinal cord so highlight the importance of this. The initial 10 ish slides are all review so I'm going to go through them really quickly so as you can see the spinal cord is located inside the vertebra and there are three layers of meninges with the cushion of cerebral spinal fluid there are 31 pairs of spinal nerves but only 30 vertebra so there is a C8 the cervical eight spinal nerve actually exiting in between the cervical and thoracic vertebra. There are two enlargements, one cervical, one lumbar sacral ***********. And these enlargements are correlating with the upper body or arms and lower body or the legs innervation. And the spinal cord end early. They don't reach all the spinal vertebrae. They actually ended by the lumbar two spinal vertebra the very end of the spinal cord right here is called conus medullaris and you have this big bundles of spinal nerve forming like a horse tail and the latin name of the horse tail quad equina is given to describe this structure and then you also have this fiber-like, very hard fiber-like structure called film terminali. It's extending from the column medullarius all the way down to connect with the vertebra. This is formed from pure matter to anchor the spinal cord and stabilize it. And this kind of brings us to ask the question, how do we sample the CSF? What is the optimal location that we can insert our needle to extract the cerebrospinal fluid? As you can imagine, we wanted to reach into the large area that has the lumbar cistern, that has a lot of CSF, but without the major spinal cord tissue themselves, right? So because the spinal cord ended at the lumbar 2 level, that's why when we try to sample, we can insert our needle in between either 3 or 4 or in between lumbar 4 and 5 vertebra to extract the CSF. Similarly, we could do the intrathecal injections to deliver drugs or epidural injections reach the same area of the spinal vertebra so with the meninges of the spinal cord as you can compare with a cranial meninges we have several different special features so with the dura matter the spinal cord has only one layer instead of two layers for the cranium. And for the peer matter, there's also a special feature called denticulate pigment. So it's this type of structure. These are coming from the peer matter that's forming to attach with the dura matter to stabilize the spinal cord. and here are the major differences between the cranial meninges and spinal meninges you can fill in the blank yourself but main ones are the dura mater has single layered in the spinal cord and there is a real space at epidural space in between the dura and the vertebrae periosteum. And we also have the special denticulate ligament at the spinal cord. In terms of the bony structure, the spinal cord actually is very well protected inside the spinal vertebra. So the dorsal aspect is a spinous process, and then the ventral aspect is a vertebral body. Now let's look at the cross-section of the spinal cord. As you can see here, the spinal cord is relatively small. Alongside the axis of the spinal cord, there is gray matter, and you can see here that's where the cell body is located. And then you have white matter surrounding the gray matter. Those are the axons or the lung tracts located. And the gray matter always have this butterfly shape and you can divide that into the dorsal horn which is on the dorsal side and also ventral horn that's on the ventral side and you would have this coming into the dorsal horn that's the dorsal root and then coming out of the ventral horn would be the ventral root what happens if there is a disc herniation we always heard about patients have the disc carnation, right? And this is a disc. We can look at it, a detailed structure in the next slide. So the disc, you know, the name of it, you can imagine it's like a ring structure. So basically you have this ring. The outside is an annulus. It's a hard ring structure and the inside is nucleus. That's a soft tissue, almost like the spinal cord itself. So you can see this ring type structure located in between the two vertebrae. And when there is any lesion to this ring structure, you can see the bulging out of this nucleus materials that can press on either the spinal root or press on the ventral horn of the spinal cord. And that will cause either the sensory deficits like, you know, strong pain and numbness, or you can experience weakness because the ventral horn is controlling the motor function of the spinal cord. Showing here in more details the cross section of the spinal cord this is one spinal segment as you can see you have the dorsal horn connect with the dorsal rootlets a bunch of small rootlets forming the dorsal root and then you have the dorsal ventral rootlets coming out of the ventral horn forming the ventral root and the dorsal root and ventral root merge into a spinal nerve and there is a famous structure called dorsal root ganglion. This is where the cell bodies of the primary neurons located. And this dorsal root ganglion innervating, you know, sending the axons to the dorsal horn of the spinal cord that's sending the sensory information in into the segment. Each segment innervates a dermatome. So this segment will have the innervation of a specific area of the skin. As you can see here, this is a mat for which nerve innervating which territory on the skin. As you can see, they're all color-coded from the cervical all the way to the sacral and coccygeal segment of the spinal nerves. So for the cervical, I don't know if you notice that it's actually starting from number two to eight what happened to c1 so turns out that c1 spinal nerve does not have the skin representation it actually innervates the dura the cerebral meninges and there's also the v1 to v3 so as you can imagine this is the trigeminal nerve, the three branches for the trigeminal nerve. You do need to remember the general locations of these different segments innervation. The dermatome territory is shown very distinctively in this disease called shingles. So you can see here the characteristic type of zoster that's resulted from ****** virus infection so this is the one dermatome usually caused by childhood infection and then it becomes dormant and and the virus is hidden in the dorsal ganglion DRG and usually in the adulthood when there's an immune system you know decreased function like some kind of compromise due to stress or aging, these viruses can be reactivated and produce these very characteristic rash within the same dermatome. So this is one DRG related dermatome, and it's usually on one side of the body. It doesn't cross midline to go to the other side. Okay, so we talked about the dorsal horn or posterior horn, anterior horn or ventral horn. There's also a lateral horn called intermediate gray. So the lateral horn is hosting the autonomic neurons, which we're going to cover later. And this is the gray matter division. For the white matter, we also have, you know, the gray matter dividing the white matter into three segments. So there is posterior segment, which is this area, and then you have the lateral funiculus, which is this large area, and then you also anterior funiculus. So these three areas are hosting different long tracks that are important for the function. As you can see here on the left side, we're showing the large myelinated fibers coming into the dorsal horn deeper lamina and synapse with the forming some reflexes. It also goes ipsilateral to the upper level to the medulla. And then we also have small thin fibers that come in to carry the pain and temperature information and synapse directly at the spinal cord dorsal horn, the superficial layer. And we also have this large myelinated motor neurons that's called lower motor neurons that are sending the axons to innervate the muscles. At the intermediate grade, the lateral horn, you have the autonomic neurons sending out the fibers, usually are small and non -myelinated. Another way of separating the different layers of the gray matter is called laminae of rex. So the gray matter can be divided into 10 different lamina. And you can see here the superficial dorsal horn, those two laminas, one and two, is more for the pain and temperature information called substantia gelatinosa. And then there's a nucleus proprius. That's more for the center order neurons for the pain and temperature sensation. And for the column of Clark's, this is more for the signals, the proprioception signals going to the cerebellum for the motor coordination. And the lateral horn we talked about is autonomic nervous system, the preganglionic neurons located. And then for the ventral horn, there is a small map that's showing the top or bottom half of the ventral horn is innervating either flexors or extensors. Or if we divided the ventral horn from the medial versus the lateral portion, then the medial portion is for the proximal part of the limb and lower body. Or the lateral segment is for the distal part of the limb. The neurotransmitters secreted in the spinal cord is similar to the brain, relatively simple, with excitatory neurotransmitters and inhibitory neurotransmitters. The major excitatory neurotransmitters are glutamate and acetylcholine. And glutamate is mainly for the primary afferent as well as descending projection neurons, while acetylcholine is for the autonomic preganglionic neurons. and also lower motor neurons using for innervating the muscles. Inhibitory neurotransmitters, there is a special type called glycine. So the glycine inhibitory neurotransmitters is specifically located in the renshaw cells, the interneurons. And those transmitters are uniquely located in the spinal cord and brainstem. GABA is also widely distributed in the spinal cord, as well as in the brain. There are also a bunch of neuropeptide producing neuromodulatory effect. Those are usually related with pain, such as Sutton's P, enkeletons, and CGRP, calcitonin gene-related peptide. The importance of interneurons can be shown clearly by this disease called tetanus. So tetanus is caused by the infection of these gram -positive bacteria called Clostridia tetanine through the open wounds. And those bacteria release tetanospasmin, which is a proteinase that can cleave the snare protein to block neurotransmitter release from the inhibitor interneurons, like blocking the GABA and glycine release. so the result is uh you know the muscle cannot relax and it's maintained in the ******* state and so for uh so if this happens the infection happens in the brain stem then you would see the uh recess sardonicus which means the sardonic smile so basically you can see the facial muscles are uh you know in the contracted state and you have this a permanent grin and raised eyebrows and also it can be uh you know shown as a locked draw the trismus if it happens in the spinal cord blocks the ring shell cells of the glycine release then you would have this very characteristic body gesture um like uh you know the extensor muscles are contracted and it's called opistotonous. Basically, it's the opposite tone. So kind of you see all the muscle contraction in the limbs and the back as well. So very painful form. The treatment is usually preventative. We do every 10 years, we do boosters of the vaccine and then you can use diazepam to relax the muscles and use antibiotics to treat the infection itself okay let's look at some of the spinal reflexes it's a basic pattern of motor coordination the most famous one probably we know here you know it's a knee **** reflex right the doctor using a little hammer to knock underneath a patient's knees. It's heavily modified by the descending input. The simplest reflex is called stretch reflex. So the stretch reflex is only involving two neurons. So one sensory neuron that's sending the information into the spinal cord, synapse with the one motor neuron that sent the innervation to the same muscle. So you can see here the doctor using a little hammer tapping to induce a patellar reflex. So this is a monosynaptic reflex that involves only one synapse, monosynaptic. And it's also called deep tendon reflex. These deep tendon reflex have a specific use by the neurologist. Now, the question is what neurotransmitters are released in this monosynaptic stretch reflex? The answer is glutamate and acetylcholine. So glutamate is released by the primary neuron, sensory neurons, and acetylcholine is released by this motor neuron to innervate the muscle. These are the important spinal reflex that's being tested a lot by the neurologist. So you do need to remember what are the correlating spinal cord segments related with these reflexes. In the first aid, there is a mnemonics to help you remember these. So, one, two, buckle my shoe, Achilles reflex. And then three, four, kick the door with your patellar reflex. Five, six, pick up sticks, use your hand. And then seven, eight, laid out straight, that would be your triceps reflex. So remember those. the second reflex i'd like to introduce is called withdrawal reflex a classic example for withdrawal reflex is when we touch the hot stove you know we immediately withdraw our hand and then before we even know it right so this response is a quick response from the spinal reflex and this reflex obviously is more complex than the simplest deep tendon reflex. As you can see, interneurons are involved with this process. And so it involves multiple muscle as well. Some are activated and others are inhibited. And during this process, the neurotransmitters involved will include not only the glutamate and acetylcholine, but also glycine. So as we mentioned previously, the glycine is in the interneurons, the major inhibitor neurotransmitters there. This is an even more complex reflex called cross extensor reflex. The example is that if we step on a sharp object with one foot then immediately you withdraw one foot you know you lift up this one foot but then you have to put the weight and shift your balance to the other side the other foot and so this process involves a lot of interneurons and multiple muscles within both limbs you can imagine all these neurotransmitters would be involved as well Okay, so we've talked about the spinal cord gray matter. Now we're going to move on to the spinal white matter. Before we do that, make sure you take a deep breath, take a coffee break, or take a short walk. Whatever can make you relax and then come back with a fresh mind. Drawing here, you see the blue color-coded sensory tracks and red color-coded motor tracks. Note that these tracks are bilateral, so they're symmetrical, not only on one side. Don't panic when you see so many tracks here. We're only going to focus on three major long tracks in this lecture. We have two ascending or sensory tracks that collecting the information from the peripheral and then send information into the spinal cord. Specifically, cunid fasciculus and gracile fasciculus are forming the dorsal column. This is a DCML pathway to carry the touch and properception information. And then we also have spinothalamic tract. The spinosalamic tract is carrying the pain and temperature information from the peripheral to the brain. And then we also have a major motor tract called the lateral corticospinal tract. This is coming from the motor cortex to innervate the muscles. Let's talk about the ascending pathways first. So for ascending pathways means the information comes from the peripheral and being sent up to the cerebral cortex to have the sensation of a different aspect of the sensory function. And the first one is called the DCML pathway. So all of these ascending pathways has three neuron relays. They have the first primary A-frame neurons. We also call it first order neurons. These neurons for the touch and proprioception is located at the dorsal root ganglion with the cell body. And then the fibers are sending inside the spinal cord via the fasciculus cuneatus and uh fasciculus gracilis so those two are in charge of the lower limb and upper limbs so the fasciculus gracilis is located more medial to the dorsal column and then the fasciculus cuneatus is located more lateral so how to remember this uh if you remember a person you know this is a person's body. And then you can imagine the legs are more in the middle and the arms are more sticking out. So the medial part is the fasciculus gracilis and the lateral part is fasciculus cuneatus that carrying the upper limb information. So that's a primary afferent or first order neurons so located inside the dorsal column and we can see the secondary order neurons here at the medulla level so from the spinal cord you would have this information being sent up and then synapse at this medulla secondary order neurons right here at nucleus gracilis or nucleus cuneatus. So these secondary order neurons will send the axons and cross the midline to form medial lemniscus. So the first part is a dorsal column, DC, and the second order neurons send axons to form ML, so medial lemniscus. And so that's why this pathway is called DC -ML pathway. way. And so second order neurons send the axons out to the contralateral side and then reach the third order neurons that are located at the thalamus. And then from here, it will go up to the somatosensical cortex with the perception of the pain of the touch and properception sensation. so the decussion point is at medulla this is very important for judging what happens with the lesions at each level now what happens if there is some lesion to these long tracts so please pay attention here this is very difficult material so for example if i have a lesion to the fasciculus gracilis at the lumbar spinal cord, a lesion on the left side, for example, what kind of deficit would the patient experience? Think about it. So the information now is carried from the left side of the lower limb, right, the legs or the lower body. This information will be cut so it's not able to pass through to be transmitted to the brain right so that's why you have this deficit from the same side or the left side of the of the body the left lower limb if you have a lesion here at the cervical cord dorsal column now the information is not only carried from the leg, but also carried from the arms, right? From the left arm is coming into the spinal cord at this level. So if you have a lesion here, then you would have the deficit from both the arm and the leg of the same side, you know, of the left side. So you're what we call the ipsilateral deficit. So ipsilateral means the same side of the lesion, you know, which is the star here, and the deficit, you know, and the lack of sensation. They're on the same side. So now this is happening in the spinal cord level. What happens when it's above the decosition? So remember, we talked about this fiber, You know, once they reach the medulla, they're actually changed to the second order neurons that send the axons to the contralateral side and then ascending. Right. So when lesions happens on the let's say on the right hand side, either at the palms, midbrain or thalamus, if you have a lesion on the right side. that above the decosition or after the decosition, what side of the body is going to not experience the touch and perception? So the answer is the contralateral side. What do I mean by contralateral side? So right now, the lesion is on the right side, right? On information being passed along by this part of the medial amniscus actually comes from the left side of the body, right? So the information comes in from here to the spinal cord and then cross to the other side, contralateral side, and all the way up to the brain. So this is when you have any lesions above this decussition or after this decussition, you're going to see lack of touch and proprioception information being transmitted from the left side of the body. That means after the decussition, you're going to have contralateral deficit, but before the decussition at the spinal level, you're going to see ipsilateral deficit. Okay, after you understand the DCML pathway, the spinothalamic tract would be much easier to appreciate. So the major difference is that the spinothalamic tract is carrying pain and temperature sensation. It also has three neuron relays. The primary afferent neurons, or first-order neurons, are collecting the information from the peripheral send the information to the dorsal horn of the spinal cord and then synapse right here to the secondary order neurons at the dorsal horn of the spinal cord previously we mentioned the substantial latinosa and nucleus proprius at the superficial layer of the spinal cord dorsal horn the cell body located there they send the axons out and then these axons are crossing the midline at the anterior white commissure and alongside the spinosalamic tract STT and then goes all the way up to the thalamus to see that's at the third order neurons here. So the third order neurons send out the axons all the way to the somatosensory cortex. That's where we have the pain sensation. So this pathway is a little more straightforward since it doesn't have the differentiation between the lower limb and the upper limb. So all of these are corresponding with the specific spinal segment. So when the lesions happen to this pathway anywhere along the spinal cord or in the brain most majority of the time the lesion you know on let's say on the right side you would experience the pain and temperature deficit on the left side of the body because of this decomposition happens right here at the spinal cord level so when you have any lesion of the spinophilamic tract, almost always you would have the contralateral deficit. So that means the body is on the one side and the lesion is on the other side. So contralateral deficit. I like to mention here, this is a small diagram, but it's also important in terms of the, you know, which side is the leg, which side is the arm information. So for the DCML pathway, you remember that the fasciculus gracilis carrying the leg information is more medial at the spinal cord, right? And for the spinosalamic tract, it's the opposite. So the leg information is carried more lateral compared to the arm information. So you just need to remember one, and then the other one is the opposite. That would be enough. Okay, let's summarize what we have talked about for the ascending pathways. For the ascending sensory pathways, we talked about lesions before the decusition is causing ipsilateral deficits. So before decusition for the DCML pathway is uh you know in the spinal cord right because the decomposition happens at the medulla level and then for uh after the decomposition then you would see the contralateral deficit which means the deficit and the lesion side are uh on the contrary are on the opposite side similarly for the pain and temperature pathway because of the decomposition happens right at the spinal cord level. That's why lesion of the spinothalamic tract would almost always cause the contralateral deficit. So that's the summarized statement. Okay, now let's look at the descending pathways controlling the motor activity. The major one is called corticospinal tract. That's one of the most important voluntary movement tract. If you want to carry a coffee, you know, want to drink coffee, you need to reach out to the coffee cup. And those muscle coordinations are all coming from the corcospinal tract. So this tract, just from the name, you can imagine that it starts from the cortex, from the motor cortex. If you remember the anatomy lab, this is precentral gyrus, right? and then the cell body is located in that precentral gyrus and the axons comes all the way down to the spinal cord and you know over here when passing the pyramid there is a decosition that it goes to the contralateral side and then going down the spinal cord then comes into the ventral horn of the spinal cord and the synapse at the lower motor neuron here at the ventral horn to innervate the muscle. So this is a very long tract. And that's why, you know, when we have this two neuron relay, this top one from the cortex all the way to the spinal cord is called upper motor neuron. And then the cell bodies located in the ventral horn, those are called lower motor neurons. So this is a major corticospinal tract. Remember the decosition is at the pyramid. So pyramid is right at the junction between medulla and a spinal cord. Now what happens with the lesion for the descending tract? So remember the descending tract, the direction is this way. So we have the decosition at the pyramid. And then so this part you know from the cortex all the way to the pyramid this is before the decosition and then all the spinal cord because now you pass the decosition this is after the decosition so if we have a lesion at the spinal cord you can imagine that if we have a lesion here then this corticospinal tract would not be able to control the neurons that are innervating the muscles at the ipsilateral side. So therefore, if any lesions at the spinal level, you would experience the ipsilateral deficit of the motor control. And on the contrary, if you have any lesion at the upper level above the pyramid, then you can see that this track will not be able to come down to innervate the opposite side of the muscle. That's why you're going to have the contralateral deficit. So contralateral deficit here. So in summary, for the descending tracks, lesions before the decosition cause contralateral deficit right this is before and the lesions after the decomposition will cause the ipsilateral deficit therefore at the spinal level it's always ipsilateral deficit ipsilateral paralysis below the level of lesions now let's look at the general rules of lateralization as we just talked, for the descending tracts, the lesions before the decosition causing the contralateral deficit, and the lesions after the decosition cause ipsilateral deficit. On the contrary, for the ascending tracts, we were talking about that lesions before the decosition will cause ipsilateral deficit, and lesions after the decosition will cause the contralateral deficits. So these are completely opposite, right? You see that. So in order to simplify this complex rule, I actually noticed that for both ascending and descending tracks, we actually have a consistent conclusion if we use below the decaxation and above the decaxation. So below decaxation means along the neurexis. So spinal cord would be below the brainstem medulla and the brainstem medulla would be lower than the cortex. So this is like this is like above so this is like below. That's the neurexis along the neurexis. So for both ascending and descending tracks, they could become consistent if we use this below and above decosition rule. Because for ascending tracks, before decosition is actually below the decosition, but for descending track, the before decosition is actually above decosition. So let me illustrate a little bit more. in the here again we have our ascending tracks and descending lung tracks so the ascending we have the dcml and the spinothalamic tract that are going up and then for the descending we have the corticospinal tract that coming down with the signals And as you can see here, the decomposition for DCML is at the medulla level. And when we have before the decomposition, then we'll see the ipsilateral deficit. When we have after the decomposition, we'll see the contralateral deficit. This is because the signal is carried by the same side of the of the tract or the contralateral side of the tract so similarly for the ascending tract of spinosalamic tract the decision is right at the spinal cord level and then you have a very short small before decomposition circuitry which is the primary sensory neurons as well as the dorsal horn before the synapse, right? But most majority, once it forms a spinosalamic tract, it would always be on the contralateral side. So you have a large proportion of after the decosition and a very small proportion of before decosition. For the descending tract, the corticospinal tract, we have the decosition at the pyramid level. And so you have also a pretty long before decosition and after decosition at the spinal cord levels. Anything above the spinal would be before the decosition. And we explained previously that for the before decosition, you would have contralateral deficit. For after decosition, you have lipidolateral deficit. So if we combine these, you know, unify these together by drawing a line about where the decomposition is, you can see that above the decomposition, you would see the contralateral deficit, regardless whether it's ascending or descending track. Versus when it's below the decomposition, you would always have the ipsilateral deficit. Ipsilateral means the lesion and the deficits are on the same side of the body. That was a hard segment of this lecture. So make sure you look at those slides and then think about the side lateralization again. And, you know, this is the hardest part for the neuroblock is, you know, be able to deduct which side of the lesion and which level of the lesion would cause a specific deficit and vice versa. So if you see some kind of a presentation of the problems the patient is experiencing, then you would be able to identify which side the lesion possibly would be and at which level. So that's the very important skill to have. Okay, let's look at the blood supply for the spinal cord. For the blood supply, there are two arteries. One is the posterior spinal artery, which is at the dorsal surface. There are actually two posterior spinal arteries, you know, one on each side. But there's only one anterior spinal artery that's coming off of the vertebral artery. So one anterior spinal artery at the ventral or anterior surface of the spinal cord. So the territory looks just like that. so the anterior spinal artery innervating the ventral horn and part of the most majority part of the lateral the ciculus and then for the posterior artery you have the location at the dorsal horn as well as the dorsal column so that's a territory now the question is what deficits would you expect with anterior spinal artery ******? And what about the posterior spinal artery ******? Now let's look at the exact deficit we should be expecting when there is anterior or posterior spinal artery strokes. So knowing their territory, we can relatively easily deduct what type of a deficit we would be seeing. So first structure is at the ventral horn neurons. So these alpha motor neurons are innervating specific muscles, right? So these muscle fibers are innervated by these large neurons sending out the axons. So when there's a lesion of the ventral horn you would expect the same level of the lesion would experience the same level of deficit so the muscles innervated directly by these neurons would not be able to contract so it's going to be on the same side and you know the it's going to impact only the myotome innervated by these specific neurons. For a large tract like white matter tract, the upper motor neuron within the corticospinal tract here, it would be a different story because these fiber bundles are fed by the fibers coming through from above this level all the way down to below this level, right? So for example, if this is our cervical level, that if you cut the fibers here at the cervical, let's say C3, then you would have problem contracting the muscles from the upper limb as well as from the lower limb because all of these fibers would be severed. So everything down below would not receive the innervation. So you have that below level of lesion and, you know, it's a lateral deficit. For the third one right here, so this is our spinothalamic tract. Same thing, the lung fibers, you know, these bundle of fibers are fed in from all the fibers below this, you know, cervical C3 level, for example. So then you would see the pain and temperature deficit for the C3 and below. So you would have upper and lower limb pain and temperature deficit. Now are you able to deduct what kind of deficit you would experience with posterior spinal artery strokes so we know the posterior artery ****** the territory is on the you know the dorsal end of the spinal cord so that's kind of the boundary for posterior spinal arteries and then number four is our dorsal column so the dorsal column Like, again, it's a white matter, large bundle of fibers that's being fed in by all the fibers below this C3 level. So you're going to see the below level deficits with fine touch and proprioception. And then these are on the ipsilateral side because they're still below the level of decomposition, right? The decomposition happens in the medulla. and here for the gray matter you know the dorsal horn this is the same thing as our ventral horn you know with the gray matter lesion you would see only the same level of the lesion you can you're going to see the deficit so it's at the level of dermatome only because these dorsal horn neurons are receiving information from this specific patch of skin, specific sensory neurons that coming in to synapse at this dorsal horn and then goes through this secondary order neurons to cross the midline and then feed into the other side spinothalamic tract. so it's only receiving the information from this dermatome from these primary sensory neurons so the deficit would be on the same side because this is before our decomposition right and with this dermatome only right that's all the long tracks that we covered for this section. As you can see here, this is summary slide. Let's go over these again. So with the red line, this is, you know, the sensory information comes in to the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. This is related to the pain and temperature information because you can see it's a thin, unmyelinated or thinly myelinated or unmyelinated axons coming into the spinal cord synapse as a second -order neurons at the substantia gelatinosa or nucleus proprius and the second order neurons send the axons over to the other side cross anterior white commissure to reach spinothalamic tract so the spinothalamic tract is on the opposite side of where the sensory information coming in so the decaxation happens right here at anterior white commissure. Now the second ascending pathway is for the touch and proprioception. So this is the very thick myelinated axons coming into the spinal cord. It can synapse at the deeper level of the dorsal horn or just go ipsilaterally up to reach medulla where they have the decomposition at the medulla level. For the DCML dorsal column medial amniscus pathway, we have two segments. One segment is fasciculus gracilis. The second one is fasciculus cuneatus. And the fasciculus gracilis is innervating the lower limbs or the lower body. So that's in the medial side of the dorsal column. On the latter side of the dorsal column, the fasciculus cuneatus appears only in the cervical spinal cord, and that's for the upper body and upper limb, like arms and hands. So those two parts forming the posterior column or dorsal column. And then this dorsal column synapses at medulla, at brainstem, and then becomes, you know, decacit, and then goes to the other side, become medial amniscus. So that's the DCML pathway. And for the major descending pathway, we have the lateral corticospinal tract. This one, the cortical cell body is coming from the contralateral side of the motor cortex at the precentral gyrus, and then decasite at the pyramid level, and comes down to the spinal cord, and then eventually synapse with the lower motor neurons at the ventral horn. So that's the three major tracks. Now, test yourself. See what happens with these lesions, you know, the lesions at these areas that are marked with the lines. And think about what kind of deficit you should be looking at. And here's the answer. You can compare your notes with the conclusion here. And that's all for this lecture if you have any questions feel free to email me and if you have any feedbacks please use this link to send me some of the suggestions thank you very much