

======================================
FILE: pdfs/Lecture # 73. M. Plummer, M.D..pdf
======================================

--- SLIDE 1 ---
Neuronal Tumors,
Medulloblastoma,
and Meningioma

ScholarRx
ScholarRx
0:00 / 14:14
1x
After completing this brick, you will be able to:
Define and describe the pathology and clinical presentation of
meningioma.
Define and describe the pathology and clinical presentation of
medulloblastoma.
Define neuronal tumors, including ganglioglioma, and describe
the pathology and clinical presentation.

What Are Neuronal Tumors, Medulloblastoma, and
Meningioma?

Please note that in the part 1 and part 2 discussions of all brain
tumors, benign or malignant, the assumption is that they are
primary. However, some sources indicate that almost half of brain
tumors in hospitalized patients are metastatic tumors from other
organs, such as the lung or skin (melanoma).  Please see the
required supplemental handout for this topic posted on Canvas.

--- SLIDE 2 ---
Neuronal tumors, medulloblastoma, and meningioma are considered
primary brain tumors that originate within the brain. Although often
malignant, primary brain tumors seldom spread to distant organs. In fact,
more brain tumors are metastases from other organs than primaries.
Without much proliferation, there is less potential for mutagenesis and
thus carcinogenesis. As brain tumors grow, they eventually compress or
invade brain tissue, becoming symptomatic or even life-threatening.
These three types of primary brain tumors originate from different cell
lineages: meningiomas from the meninges, medulloblastomas from
embryonic tissue, and neuronal tumors from neural elements (Figure 1).
What Are Meningiomas?
Meningiomas account for 20%-30% of primary brain tumors, making them
the most common of all primary brain tumors. They are just what they
sound like—tumors of the meningeal tissue (dura mater, arachnoid, and
pia mater). Meningiomas arise from the arachnoid cells. About 20,000 new
meningiomas are diagnosed yearly, with a 2:1 female-to-male
predominance. They are typically slow-growing, peripheral masses mainly
in adults. They have a good prognosis with surgery because they are not
attached to the brain. If complete resection is not possible, or if surgery is
not even an option, radiation therapy is the second-line treatment.
Tap image for quiz
Infiltrating astrocytomas and glioblastomas make up about 80% of
primary brain tumors, (Robbins).  As stated in the Scholar Rx bricks
for Gliomas, glioblastomas make up about half of primary adult
brain tumors. The statement above, indicating that meningiomas
account for the most common type of primary brain tumor, does
not appear accurate. Perhaps "primary benign brain tumor" may be
more accurate  Remember, sources do vary when describing
percentages.

--- SLIDE 3 ---
Characteristics
These tumors grow so slowly, and they can often become quite large before
producing symptoms, because the brain has plenty of time to adjust to the
added pressure. Eventual symptoms include headache, seizure, vision
problems, and focal neurological deficits (eg, weakness in an extremity).
Symptoms are largely dependent on the location of the tumor. The most
common locations include parasagittal, falcine, and convexities (Figure 2).
Please note that because of the presence of progesterone
receptors on meningiomas, they  may increase in size during
pregnancy.  
Menigiomas are often described as "dural-based".
Neurofibromatosis type 2 is a predisposing factor for meningioma, and
molecular testing has revealed up to 80% of these tumors may have
mutations in the NF2 gene.
Tap image for quiz
please see handout

--- SLIDE 4 ---
A very common imaging finding for meningioma is a “dural tail,” as they
grow from the meninges, and indicates their extra-axial origin. Grossly,
these tumors are well circumscribed.
Histology
On histology, you can see spindle cells arranged in a whorled pattern and
lamellated calcifications known as psammoma bodies (Figure 3).
This is only one histological subtype of meningioma but it is
probably the most common - there are several others but just be
familiar with this one.
Psammoma bodies occur in a few other important conditions that should
be remembered and differentiated from one another.
Tap image for quiz

--- SLIDE 5 ---
What Are Medulloblastomas?
Medulloblastomas are the most common malignant brain tumor in
children. An embryonal tumor is embryonic tissue remaining in the brain
after birth that becomes neoplastic. Symptoms develop over weeks to
months, with the definitive diagnosis usually confirmed within 3 months
of symptom onset. Medulloblastomas primarily occur in the cerebellum.
Typical symptoms include headache, cranial nerve VI palsies, and
cerebellar ataxia. Because these tumors can grow into the fourth ventricle,
hydrocephalus is also a possibility.
Characteristics
Medulloblastomas are high-grade tumors. Usually treatment consists of
resection followed by radiation and chemotherapy. The prognosis largely
depends on resection and molecular characteristics. Metastases are
common, warranting whole neuraxis imaging. Medulloblastomas are the
most common embryonal tumors in children, with 70% being diagnosed in
children younger than 10 years. Children with average risk
medulloblastoma have a 5-year disease-free survival rate of 70% to 80%.
Overall, children younger than 3 years have poor outcomes.
Histology
On histology, there are small, round cells from an undifferentiated
embryonal lineage. The undifferentiated characteristics of this tumor make
sense: medulloblastomas are derived from embryonic tissue. Furthermore,
cells often surround a neuropil (network of nerve fibers, synapses, and glial
cells) termed Homer-Wright rosettes, which are characteristic of all tumors
with neuroblastic proliferation (Figure 4).
The molecular characteristics which make up the sub-types of
medulloblastomas are important in prognosis

--- SLIDE 6 ---
Tap image for quiz
What Are Neuronal Tumors?
Neuronal tumors comprise abnormal glial and neuronal elements. They
can be classified as pure neuronal cell tumors (eg, gangliocytomas, which
are exceedingly rare and not discussed here) or mixed neuronal cell tumors
(eg, ganglioglioma). Overall, neuronal tumors make up about 1% of all
brain neoplasms.
Most neuronal tumors are located within the brain parenchyma, producing
characteristic deficits based on location. As neuronal tumors grow, they
disrupt the normal brain architecture and thus the neuronal networks. As a
result, patients often present with seizures. Neuronal cell tumors are
usually low grade and slow growing, so they have a favorable prognosis.
They are usually cured with surgery alone.
As the name suggests, gangliogliomas are mixed neuronal cell tumors
that contain a disorganized arrangement of ganglion cells and glia
(indicating neuronal support cells). These tumors are often slow growing
and therefore usually considered benign (World Health Organization
[WHO] grade I).
Gangliogliomas have an incidence of 4% of all primary brain tumors in
children and 1% of all primary brain tumors in adults. Up to 10% can
become malignant. They tend to occur in the temporal lobes and present as
new-onset seizures in children and young adults. Treatment of these

--- SLIDE 7 ---
y
g
tumors is resection. The prognosis is good, with a 10-year survival rate of
84%-93%.
Neoplastic ganglion cells with a glial component are seen on histology.
The glial component of the tumor accounts for most of the tumor
proliferation. The neuronal component exhibits binucleated and
dysmorphic neurons with peripheral Nissl bodies. Nissl bodies are simply
the rough endoplasmic reticulum of the neuron. These neoplastic neurons
tend to cluster. If the glial component is astrocytic in nature, Rosenthal
fibers might be present. Calcifications are another common feature seen
on histology.

Summary
• Meningiomas are peripherally located tumors composed of meningeal
tissue that often appear as spindle cells arranged in a whorled pattern

tissue that often appear as spindle cells arranged in a whorled pattern
with dispersed psammoma bodies.
• Medulloblastomas are the most common embryonal tumor in children,
typically found in the cerebellum; they comprise small, round cells
forming Homer-Wright rosettes and have variable prognosis (good
with treatment, dismal without).
• Neuronal tumors can be classified as pure neuronal cell tumors or
mixed neuronal cell tumors.
• Gangliogliomas are mixed neuronal cell tumors composed of
neoplastic ganglion and glial cells; accordingly, gangliogliomas have
histologic characteristics resembling both gangliocytomas (eg,
dysplastic and often binucleated with Nissl bodies) and gliomas (eg,
Rosenthal fibers).
Review Questions



======================================
FILE: pdfs/Lecture # 73-2. M. Plummer, M.D..pdf
======================================

--- SLIDE 1 ---
Peripheral Nerve
Sheath Tumors

ScholarRx
ScholarRx
0:00 / 24:29
1x
After completing this brick, you will be able to:
Define a peripheral nerve sheet tumor, and list the common
benign and malignant types.
Describe a schwannoma and its histologic features and clinical
presentation.
Explain how the NF2 gene mutation leads to proliferation of
Schwann cells.
Describe the histologic features of neurofibroma, list the three
clinical variants, and explain which cells contain a mutation in
the NF1 gene.
Describe malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors.
Describe, compare, and contrast the incidence, clinical features,
and genetic basis of neurofibromatosis type 1 and type 2.

What Are Peripheral Nerve Sheath Tumors?
When tumors develop along the nerves of the peripheral nervous system,
they are called peripheral nerve sheath tumors. Overall, these tumors are
uncommon. But two conditions, known as neurofibromatosis type 1 and
type 2, predispose patients to developing many peripheral nerve sheath
tumors.

See handout posted in Canvas

--- SLIDE 2 ---
Some of these tumors, like schwannomas and neurofibromas, can be
benign. They can also be malignant—most commonly occurring in
neurofibromatosis type 1. We start this discussion by looking at specific
types of peripheral nerve sheath tumors, and then we look at
neurofibromatosis types 1 and 2.
What Are Schwannomas?
Schwannomas are the most common nerve sheath tumors. They are often
found incidentally when neuroimaging studies are performed. In fact,
3%-4% of people demonstrate cranial nerve schwannomas on autopsy.
How Schwannomas Present
Schwann cells are responsible for myelination of nerves in the peripheral
nervous system. Schwannomas are benign, fully encapsulated tumors
composed of neoplastic Schwann cells.
Schwannomas can be found within soft tissues, on cranial nerves,
surrounding peripheral nerves, and within internal organs. They are
typically small, slow-growing masses that present with effects of
compression of local structures or as incidental findings on imaging.
Schannomas can usually be removed from the peripheral nerve it is
attached to.  This is in contrast to plexiform neurofibromas (see
below) which infiltrate into the nerve
There is often no need to treat schwannomas. If the tumor is symptomatic
or in a position to compromise nearby structures, modalities include
surgical excision or, if intracranial, stereotactic radiosurgery.
What Schwannomas Look Like
Grossly, schwannomas are well-circumscribed masses attached to an
adjacent nerve. Although schwannomas are homogenously composed of
Schwann cells, on microscopic evaluation they demonstrate characteristic
dense and loose areas referred to as Antoni A and B, respectively (Figure
1).
below) which infiltrate into the nerve.

--- SLIDE 3 ---
Within the densely packed Antoni A, diagnostic Verocay bodies may be
observed (Figure 2). Verocay bodies demonstrate cells that align to produce
nuclear palisading—alternating nuclear and anuclear areas.
Tap image for quiz
Causes of Schwannoma Formation
Schwannomas, both sporadic and familial, form because of loss of function
of a protein called merlin. Merlin is encoded by the NF2 gene on
chromosome 22. This cytoskeletal protein functions as a tumor suppressor
through E-cadherin–mediated contact inhibition of proliferation. Contact
inhibition of proliferation is a process that prevents overgrowth of tissues
by signaling cells to discontinue proliferation when they are densely
surrounded by neighboring cells.
With loss of function of the merlin protein, Schwann cells proliferate
unchecked by contact inhibition. As is traditionally understood with tumor
suppressor genes, both copies of the NF2 gene must be nonfunctioning to
result in tumor growth, which is more likely to occur in patients already
missing one copy. This is the case in patients with neurofibromatosis type
2 (NF2), a familial condition we discuss in greater detail later.

--- SLIDE 4 ---
Vestibular Schwannoma
Schwannomas often affect the cranial nerves, most commonly the
vestibular portion of the eighth cranial nerve. Historically, schwannomas
on the eighth cranial nerve were referred to as acoustic neuromas. Because
these tumors are composed of neoplastic Schwann cells on the vestibular
nerve, they are more accurately called vestibular schwannomas, but you
will see these terms used interchangeably. (Some neuropathologists will be
unhappy if you call this tumor anything but a vestibular schwannoma
because the tumor cells are not neurons, which makes acoustic neuroma
incorrect.)
Vestibular schwannomas arise near the brainstem or within the internal
acoustic canal. Patients usually present with unilateral hearing loss, ear
fullness, tinnitus, or vestibular complaints such as dizziness.
Wh
l
i
r t th
r b ll r
ti
gl
t th
rigi
ti
f th
When lesions occur at the cerebellar pontine angle at the origination of the
eighth cranial nerve (CN), we would expect to see effects at the nearby
seventh cranial nerve. However, patients with lesions in this area more
commonly present with issues involving the trigeminal nerve (CN V)
because the facial nerve (CN VII) is less easily compressed. As the tumor
enlarges, it may compress the ipsilateral cerebellum and cause ipsilateral
ataxia (abnormal, uncoordinated movement).
Most vestibular schwannomas occur spontaneously and are unilateral.
However, about 10% of tumors are found in patients with
neurofibromatosis type 2. These patients are also much more likely to have
bilateral tumors, which are pathognomonic for this condition. Figure 3 is a
magnetic resonance image (MRI) showing bilateral masses in the
cerebellopontine angles with extension into the internal acoustic meatuses
in a patient with NF2.

--- SLIDE 5 ---
What Are Neurofibromas?
Like schwannomas, neurofibromas are benign, solitary lesions that are
commonly sporadic. However, about 10% of neurofibromas arise in
Tap image for quiz

y p
patients with neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1).
How Neurofibromas Present
Although neurofibromas and schwannomas are both benign,
neurofibromas—unlike schwannomas—can occasionally demonstrate
transformation into malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors.
Neurofibromas are typically seen in patients younger than 30 years; they
can appear as small nodular tumors but may also be large and disfiguring.
Most commonly tumors present as skin-colored or hyperpigmented small
papules or nodules. Lesions are usually asymptomatic in terms of focal
neurologic deficits, but patients may describe bleeding or local pain from a
mass effect.
What Neurofibromas Look Like
Neurofibromas are similar to schwannomas, benign tumors comprising
neoplastic Schwann cells. However, unlike schwannomas, neurofibromas
are not encapsulated, and they contain other cell types such as mast cells,
fibroblasts, and perineurial-like cells mixed among the neoplastic Schwann
cells. Figure 4 shows a neurofibroma that demonstrates loose bands of
spindle-shaped cells when viewed under light microscopy.
Another term for this look is "shredded carrots"

--- SLIDE 6 ---
Subtypes of Neurofibromas
There are three distinct subtypes of neurofibromas: localized cutaneous,
plexiform, and diffuse.
Localized cutaneous neurofibromas (Figure 5) often occur in sporadic
cases, but multiple lesions may arise in the context of NF1. These lesions
are circumscribed, nodular, or polypoid tumors.
Plexiform neurofibromas grow within the confines of a nerve or nerve
plexus. They involve multiple fascicles of individually affected nerves.
Axons may be embedded within a diffuse neoplastic Schwann cell
proliferation. This proliferation causes nerve fascicles to expand, but the
perineurium remains intact. These tumors are highly associated with NF1
and carry a small risk of malignant transformation. The tumors can be
disfiguring (Figure 6).
Tap image for quiz

--- SLIDE 7 ---
Diffuse neurofibromas demonstrate extensive infiltration within the
dermis or subcutis of the skin and are often associated with NF1. They can
present as large, disfiguring subcutaneous masses.
Causes of Neurofibroma Formation
Neurofibromas arise from nonmyelinating Schwann cells that demonstrate
loss of function of the tumor suppressor protein neurofibromin on
chromosome 17. Neurofibromin acts as a negative regulator of the Ras
oncoprotein. Ras activity drives cellular proliferation. Ras becomes
hyperactive when inhibition by neurofibromin is removed and leads to
unchecked cellular proliferation.
Patients with neurofibromatosis type 1 lack one copy of neurofibromin,
which predisposes them to the development of neurofibromas. We look at
the familial condition NF1 in greater detail below.
What Are Malignant Peripheral Nerve Sheath
Tumors?
Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNSTs) are rare but represent
a very serious form of nerve sheath pathology. Up to about 50% of MPNSTs
occur in the context of neurofibromatosis type 1. When treating these
tumors, you need to consider surgery, medical oncology, and radiation
oncology.
These tumors most commonly present on the trunk or extremities and are

--- SLIDE 8 ---
These tumors most commonly present on the trunk or extremities and are
usually discovered because of rapid tumor growth. On gross inspection,
tumors are large and firm and can demonstrate areas of necrosis and
hemorrhage. Microscopic evaluation demonstrates densely cellular,
mitotically active collections of spindle cells.
MPNSTs may grow spontaneously from previously normal nerves or result
from malignant transformation of a plexiform neurofibroma. About 10% of
cases occur as a late complication of radiation therapy.
Neurofibromatosis
We mentioned NF1 and NF2 in the context of different tumor types. Now
let’s look at them in more detail.
Neurofibromatosis type 1, also known as von Recklinghausen disease,
predisposes patients to developing neurofibromas through loss of function
of neurofibromin. This protein is encoded by a gene found on chromosome
17. NF1 has an incidence of 1 in 3000 people, and patients are at increased
risk of developing pheochromocytomas, similar to multiple endocrine
neoplasia 2 (MEN2).
Neurofibromatosis type 2 predisposes patients to developing schwannomas
through loss of function of merlin. This protein is encoded by a gene on
chromosome 22. NF2 has an incidence of about 1 in 25,000, making it
much less common than NF1.
Robbins cites a different incidence - see power point (1/40,000 -
50 000) - but the point is that NF2 is less common than NF1
How Neurofibromatosis Presents
Patients with NF1 may have Lisch nodules, which are hamartomas of the
iris that do not affect vision (Figure 7). Lisch nodules are the most specific
feature of NF1.
50,000)  but the point is that NF2 is less common than NF1

--- SLIDE 9 ---
Patients with NF1 demonstrate significant freckling, especially in an
axillary and inguinal distribution, as well as hyperpigmented macules and
patches known as café au lait spots (French for coffee with milk, referring
to the color). These spots are usually evident within the first year of life
(Figure 8).
Tap image for quiz
Patients with NF1 are predisposed to all subtypes of neurofibromas. Optic
pathway gliomas occur in up to 15% of children with NF1, typically before
6 years of age, so these children need regular formal ophthalmology
evaluations. An MRI of the brain and orbits is indicated if the child has any
visual disturbances.
Roughly 10% of patients with NF1 develop a malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumor at some point in their lifetime. Patients with NF1 also may
exhibit learning disabilities, seizures, vascular abnormalities, and skeletal
abnormalities
Tap image for quiz

--- SLIDE 10 ---
abnormalities.
Rather than neurofibromas, patients with NF2 are predisposed to develop
schwannomas. NF2 can present with bilateral vestibular schwannomas,
other cranial nerve schwannomas, cataracts, meningiomas, and cutaneous
tumors.
Table 1 summarizes the differences between NF1 and NF2.
Table 1
NF1
NF2
Inheritance
Autosomal dominant
Autosomal dominant
Chromosome
17
22
Protein product
Neurofibromin
Merlin (tumor suppressor)
Clinical features
Hyperpigmented macules,
axillary or inguinal freckling,
Lisch nodules (iris
hamartomas), neurofibromas,
optic gliomas
Bilateral vestibular
schwannomas, schwannomas of
other cranial nerves,
intracranial meningiomas,
peripheral neuropathy,
cataracts, cutaneous tumors
Treatment and Prognosis for NF1 and NF2
There is no definitive overall treatment for NF1, but patients should be
screened frequently for other problems commonly associated with the
disease. Patients typically require full body skin surveys, ophthalmologic
examinations, academic support, and monitoring for hypertension, bone
abnormalities, and seizures. There are limited mortality data, but the
lifespan for patients with NF1 is about 15 years shorter than that for the
average population.
Patients with NF2 require surveillance for tumors. Schwannomas
associated with NF2 have responded to bevacizumab (a monoclonal
antibody therapy), but radiation therapy and surgery are frequently
required. Although radiation is appropriate for treating tumors, it should
be minimized in these patients because of the likelihood of secondary
tumors. On average, patients with NF2 present at around age 20 years and
die in their 30s due to complications from their tumors.



--- SLIDE 11 ---
Summary
• Schwannomas are benign, encapsulated proliferations of neoplastic
Schwann cells.
• Microscopically, schwannomas demonstrate dense and loose areas
known as Antoni A and B, respectively.
• Verocay bodies are characteristic features of schwannomas, exhibiting
palisading nuclear and anuclear regions.
• Sporadic and familial schwannomas arise because of loss of function of
the merlin protein.
• Neurofibromas are benign proliferations of Schwann cells that also
contain other cell types.
• The three distinct subtypes of neurofibromas are localized cutaneous,
plexiform, and diffuse.
• Neurofibromas form because of loss of function of the neurofibromin
protein.
• Neurofibromin acts as a negative regulator of the Ras cell growth
pathway.
• Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNSTs) are rare but
serious cancers, and patients with NF1 are particularly at risk; MPNSTs
may arise from normal nerves or existing plexiform neurofibromas.
NF1 presents with Lisch nodules inguinal and axillary freckling café
• NF1 presents with Lisch nodules, inguinal and axillary freckling, café
au lait spots, optic gliomas, neurofibromas, and other abnormalities.
• NF2 presents with cranial nerve schwannomas, intracranial
meningiomas, cataracts, and cutaneous tumors.
• NF1 results from mutation of the gene encoding neurofibromin.
• NF2 results from mutations of the gene encoding merlin.
• NF1 requires close follow-up to evaluate and manage the disease;
patients have a decreased average lifespan.
• NF2 requires appropriate treatment of tumors and often leads to early
death.
Review Questions



======================================
FILE: pdfs/Lecture #73. M. Plummer, M.D. (HANDOUT FOR NEOCNSPNS).pdf
======================================

--- SLIDE 1 ---
From: Robbins and Cotran, Pathologic Basis of Disease, 11th edition, 2025 
METASTATIC TUMORS TO THE BRAIN 
 
Metastatic lesions, mostly carcinomas, account for approximately one-quarter to one-half of 
intracranial tumors in hospitalized patients. The five most common primary sites are lung, breast, 
skin (melanoma), kidney, and gastrointestinal tract, accounting  ...The meninges are also a 
frequent site of involvement by metastatic disease, where they may either form discrete masses 
or a more disseminated subarachnoid, meningitis-like pattern known as meningeal 
carcinomatosis ;... Metastatic tumors present clinically as mass lesions and may occasionally be 
the first manifestation of systemic cancer. In general, localized treatment of solitary brain 
metastases improves the quality and duration of the patient’s life. 
 
MORPHOLOGY 
Intraparenchymal metastases form sharply demarcated masses, often at the junction of gray and 
white matter, usually surrounded by a zone of edema. The boundary between tumor and brain 
parenchyma is usually well-defined microscopically…The tumors typically resemble their parent 
tumor type but can be very poorly differentiated in some cases; for the roughly 10% that present 
as a metastasis of unknown primary, immunohistochemistry is often helpful for further 
subtyping. Meningeal carcinomatosis, with tumor nodules studding the surface of the brain, 
spinal cord, and intradural nerve roots, is most often associated with carcinoma of the lung and 
breast. 
Familial tumor syndromes 
Neurofibromatoses  
The two forms of neurofibromatosis , NF1 and NF2, are biologically distinct familial 
autosomal dominant syndromes characterized by tumors of the peripheral and central nervous 
systems.  NF1 has a frequency of 1 in 3000 individuals and is characterized by neurofibromas of 
peripheral nerves, gliomas of the optic nerve, pigmented nodules of the iris (Lisch nodules), and 
cutaneous hyperpigmented macules (café au lait spots).  
NF2 is less common (with a frequency of 1 in 40,000 to 50,000 persons) and is characterized by 
the occurrence of bilateral vestibular (cranial nerve VIII) schwannomas, multiple meningiomas, 
and ependymomas of the cervical spinal cord.  
 
Tuberous sclerosis complex 
Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) is an autosomal dominant syndrome that occurs at a 
frequency of approximately 1 in 6000 births. It is characterized by the development of 
hamartomas and benign neoplasms involving the brain and other tissues; the most frequent 
clinical manifestations are seizures, autism, and intellectual disability. Hamartomas within the 
CNS take the form of cortical tubers and subependymal nodules; subependymal giant cell 
astrocytomas (SEGA) are benign neoplasms that appear to develop from the hamartomatous 
nodules in the same locations. Cortical tubers are often epileptogenic, and surgical resection can 
be beneficial when medical management of the seizures fails.  
Elsewhere in the body, renal angiomyolipomas, retinal glial hamartomas, pulmonary 
lymphangioleiomyomatosis, and cardiac rhabdomyomas develop during childhood and 

--- SLIDE 2 ---
adolescence. Cysts may be found at various sites, including the liver, kidneys, and pancreas. 
Cutaneous lesions include angiofibromas, localized leathery thickenings (shagreen patches), 
hypopigmented areas (ash-leaf patches), and subungual fibromas. 
One tuberous sclerosis gene (TSC1) is found on chromosome 9q34 and encodes a protein known 
as hamartin; the more commonly mutated gene (TSC2) is on 16p13.3 and encodes tuberin. These 
two proteins form a complex that inhibits the kinase mTOR, a key regulator of protein synthesis 
and other aspects of anabolic metabolism. Mutations in TSC1 or TSC2 disrupt this control and 
lead to increased and unregulated mTOR activity... Treatment is usually symptomatic, including 
anticonvulsant therapy for control of seizures; however, treatment with mTOR inhibitors has 
sometimes resulted in dramatic clinical improvement. 
 
MORPHOLOGY 
Cortical hamartomas of TSC are firm areas that, in contrast to the softer adjacent cortex, have 
been likened to potatoes (hence the appellation “ tubers ”). The tubers are composed of 
haphazardly arranged neurons that lack the normal laminar organization. In addition, some 
dysplastic cells have an appearance intermediate between glia and neurons (large vesicular nuclei 
with nucleoli, resembling neurons, and abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm resembling 
gemistocytic astrocytes); they often express intermediate filaments of both neuronal 
(neurofilament) and glial (GFAP) types. Similar hamartomatous features are present in the 
subependymal nodules, where the large astrocyte-like cells cluster beneath the ventricular 
surface. These small wax-like masses that bulge into the ventricular system gave rise to the 
term candle gutterings. Subependymal giant cell astrocytoma is histologically similar, but 
larger; it often presents with obstructive hydrocephalus. 
 
Von hippel-lindau disease 
Individuals with this autosomal dominant disease develop hemangioblastomas of the CNS; cysts 
that involve the pancreas, liver, and kidneys; renal cell carcinomas; and pheochromocytomas. 
Hemangioblastomas are most common in the cerebellum and retina but may also occur in other 
CNS locations. The disease frequency is 1 in 30,000 to 40,000 individuals.  The gene associated 
with von Hippel-Lindau disease, called VHL, is a tumor-suppressor gene located on chromosome 
3p25.3; it encodes a protein (VHL) that is a component of a ubiquitin ligase complex that down-
regulates transcription factors of the hypoxia-induced factor (HIF) family. HIFs regulate the 
expression of VEGF, erythropoietin, and other growth factors. VEGF leads to excessive vessel 
growth, contributing to the development of hemangioblastomas. Erythropoietin overexpression 
leads to polycythemia in about 10% of hemangioblastoma patients. …Therapy is directed at the 
symptomatic neoplasms, including resection of the cerebellar hemangioblastomas and laser 
therapy for retinal hemangioblastomas. 
MORPHOLOGY 
Hemangioblastomas are highly vascular neoplasms that form a mural nodule associated with a 
large fluid-filled cyst. The lesion consists of numerous capillary-size or somewhat larger thin-
walled vessels with intervening neoplastic cells that have vacuolated, lipid-rich cytoplasm. The 
neoplastic stromal cells express erythropoietin, VEGF, and inhibin (a diagnostically useful 
marker), and are believed to be derived from an early mesenchymal progenitor cell capable of 
differentiating into both endothelial and hemopoietic cells. 

