Hello, everyone. This is Pediatric Neurology 2. And I am once again, Dr. Thomas Chan, my email,
making sure my highlighter is working. And let's get started. All right, the session objectives,
really going to talk about one major finding, neurologic finding we see in kids, and that's
hypotonia. A lot of conditions that can cause hypotonia, going to give you the most important ones,
I believe, talk about head shapes, different head shapes, infection in kids that can cause
neurological issues, and of course, trauma. Unfortunately, these things happen, and we need to
discuss it. All right, so the neurological findings, you're going to do an exam on infants, which
you learned about, and you can see different issues, right? Hopefully, they have usually normal So
most kids, most infants that you see, they should not be lying flat on the table like they're lying
on a beach, right? So it should not be just hands and feet splayed out, right? If you see an infant
like that, that's probably hypotonic. When they come out, when they were in the womb, they were in a
flexed position in the womb. And when they come out, they should be like that, right? So remember my
trusty baby, so you see the legs are a little bent, the arms are a little bit flexed as well, so
they should not be like completely flat, right? So that is very, very normal. All right, so they can
have fasciculations like twitching, be very tight, rigidity, even *******. They can be
asymmetrically, you know, maybe one side of the body is stronger than another, right? The right arm,
right leg, and the left is good and the left side not so good. Or maybe the grip on one side is
stronger than another, right? So you're looking for asymmetry in general. And sometimes the muscular
tone, right? There's such a thing as hemihypertrophy in infants where one side of the body is bigger
or stronger than another, right? So, and epicitonis, which is a severe finding. That doesn't look
normal when they're severely hyperextended. All right, so all infants, we do these maneuvers to make
sure they're not hypotonic, right? That their tone is good. So the one thing you also always want to
do, most babies are on their back. And so when you lift them up, what do they do when they lift up,
right? Are they like a rag doll where the head is lagging back? Remember, the head is kind of bigger
than most of the body when they're young and the body kind of catches up. So it's like they're
lagging back and they have not much tone. That's not a great sign. Or also, we always put them on
their stomach and see what they do. right so you'll put them on the back and you can pick them up
and so they can can they fight you a little bit and show some strength um put them on their belly
and do they fall over like a little wet noodle you know and that's not normal either right so they
should have some tone they should have some tone uh and as they get older and older they can kind of
hold themselves midline you can sometimes see them struggling, pushing themselves off the table,
lifting the head up. So these are all good signs. Again, it depends on how old the infant is, but
you're going to do these tests. And the last one is something that you actually have to do, which is
you have to actually pick up the infant in your hands and see what they do, right? They shouldn't
slip through your hands. They should be holding themselves like a gymnast on the ring, right? So
they should hold themselves up very easily like this and that's a sign of good tongue. If they fall
through your hands that's a bad sign. Of course you never want to drop the baby. Usually sometimes
they're slipping through your hands and you have to feel like you're grabbing them. If you ever feel
like you have to grab the infant then that's a sign of a low tongue. These are all the a lot of the
conditions that can cause hypotonia. We'll talk about some of them. We're not going to talk about
all of them. All right. So one of the important ones to know is cerebral palsy. All right. I believe
you got some of this in previous lecture. The biggest takeaways, it's a huge topic. You can talk two
hours on just CP. But the most important takeaway is it's a non -progressive insult to the
neurological system, all right? Whatever happened, happened, and it's not progressing anymore. So
it's not like a metabolic condition and, you know, things are accumulating and worsening over time.
It's just, if it's like, so one side of the body is not working right, like the left side, it's just
going to be like that. And it's not going to spread to the right side. so could be birth history you
know problems ********* baby a hypoxic event and that's usually what happened there was some kind of
insult somewhere along the way that's causing this that caused the cerebral palsy right the *******
type is the most common type even though there are many many different types and that's where you
see upper motor neuron lesion findings increased deep tendon reflexes, spasticity, clonus, and like
a positive Bavinsky, right? Positive Bavinsky's can be normal in infants, but they usually go away
over time. In this case, you know, you might see a two -year-old and you do Bavinsky or older, and
they still have it positive where it should have gone away, right? And what's clonus, a lot of
students don't know this. even residents don't really know how what clonus is or feels like
basically it's it's severely hyper reflexic right so when you do reflexes they should uh kick up
right or you know react right clonus is like react and then they kind of beat even more afterwards
so it could be a severe reaction and a few beats after all right um so so that's clonus one or two
beats sometimes can be okay but if it's like feet that's a lot all right um in infants what we
usually do to check is is actually dorsiflex the feet right you dorsiflex feet really quickly and
usually get one or two beats like and that's normal right so a child you suspect might have cerebral
palsy You dorsiflex quickly and you go, all right, so that's clonus, sustained clonus. All right,
first condition we're talking about, spinal muscular atrophy. And this is a classic, what we call
floppy baby, right? So when you hear floppy baby, also known as really very, very hypotonic baby,
like no tone, and this is the baby that's just kind of lying there like on the beach. It cannot
fight gravity at all, right? Most common type that you see is the type 1, what we call Warding
-Hoffman disease, right? Severely hypotonic, very little muscle mass, doesn't come as a surprise.
And it's a problem with the anterior horn. So I think you got this from another lecture as well. Do
you have absent deep tendon reflexes? And because they have no musculature, and for super hypotonic,
you know, they have problems swallowing, so they can't eat right. They've even had problems
breathing. Very classically, they have tongue fasciculations, right? They end up in wheelchairs
very, very early in their life and physically handicapped. And I say physically because a lot of
times these kids, the brain is working fine, right? So the classic infant is just laying there,
can't do much, but it has very, very bright eyes and looking at you, right? Will smile. You can see
that observing everything. And, you know, these are the type of kids that I've encountered that have
had spinal muscular atrophy. They just bodies are just not working right. They're in their
wheelchairs, but they can have a conversation with you. They understand a lot. And it's quite tragic
because it's like the brain is working fine and the body just doesn't, right? Down syndrome, another
syndrome, and every system you're going to get, Down syndrome is going to be in it because it has so
many findings, right? So there's the common physical findings that a lot of us will associate it
with Down syndrome. I list them here, but one physical finding neurologically, it's not something
you actually see, it's what you feel, right? So this is when, this is the infant that you pick up,
and they kind of start falling through your hands a little bit, or when you do a little bit, pull
them up when they're, when they're supine, the head's lagging a little bit, right? So they have, you
know, generalized hypotonia. They're not floppy baby like Ruddick-Hoffman, which is severely
hypotonic, but they're just a little, they're definitely weaker than they should be, right? So So
that's one of those physical findings that it's not something you see. It's something you kind of
feel as you're doing the exam, all right? And, of course, they have lots of associated problems.
Basically, every system you're going to see Down syndrome is there that they have a problem, all
right? And this is something a lot of people don't realize. They're very, very flexible a lot of
times. You can see this infant able to put his foot in his mouth, which a lot of infants do. but you
see a lot of them have significant joint laxity. All right, Prader -Willi syndrome, another very
interesting syndrome. This is the problem with the deletion of paternal chromosome 15, right? Always
a board question, it's all over the place. And the biggest thing is that when they're first born,
they're very, very hypotonic and weak. They don't actually eat well. But one day they, it's like
something, a switch goes off in the brain, they get older, like a young child, and all of a sudden
they start eating, and they never stop eating, right? And they never want to stop eating, they never
feel full, and it leads to severe obesity, right? So everyone thinks of Prader-Willi as an obese
syndrome and hyperphagic. They have development delays, hypoclonitis, and maybe short little hands,
small little hands and feet. But they don't realize that when they were infants, that it was the
opposite problem. Parents had trouble getting them to gain weight, that they were very, very
hypotonic. And when they get older, you need extreme, extreme measures to keep their weight under
control. A lot of times, these are the kids, they're very lovable, actually. Just like Down syndrome
kids, very, very lovable. They smile and they look at you, but they always want food. So many
parents, often what you have to do is actually put a lock on their refrigerator so the kids can't
get in, lock the cupboards in the refrigerators and so they don't eat themselves to death,
unfortunately, right? And you have to actually tell neighbors because they're lovable, they can move
around. You have to tell the neighbors that, you know, Johnny might, you know, don't give Johnny any
food. He can hang out at your house when he comes, but, you know, don't feed him. And this is, you
know, classic overweight. And this is in C, you can see someone who's controlled their weight with
the help of an endocrinologist and geneticist. And it takes a lot of effort to do this, right? A
patient I had with part of ***** syndrome when I was a third year student, and I was in an emergency
room, was unfortunately, I think, 30 something, 40 something year old person who came and coded from
Prada *****. And he had basically had a massive heart attack at that young age. It's because they
have all these problems of obesity and poor health from the obesity. Right. Dermatomyositis. I
always say this one is so easy because it's all named dermato, something in the skin and myositis.
So something in the muscle, right? So the proximal muscle weakness um and that means you know the
shoulders and hips so anything that you need those muscles they have problems doing right so uh
brushing the hair so the classic uh story is that you know he or she brush the hair once or twice
and then they have to kind of take a rest trouble lifting things or getting things under cover uh
climbing stairs these are the muscle the muscles that you need, the proximal muscles you need to do
these activities. Classic dermatological findings is the heliotrope rash, the violet colored rash
around the eyelids and these little joint findings, these groton papules above the joints, okay? All
right, Duchenne's. Again, another condition you're gonna hear in other lectures. So I'm not gonna go
over the path physiology, but obviously it's a problem with the dystrophin, right? And the
dystrophin is not working. So it's the mutation, the dystrophin gene. So, and what happens that
because it's not working, your muscles are obviously weak. So this is not one of those conditions
that, like again, Wordenhoff and floppy or hypotonic as an infant. These kids, you know, they might
be a little bit lower tone, But usually you find that the problem progresses in very early
childhood, right? So something I mentioned is that sometimes they get the pseudohypertrophy of the
calf. So the calf is big, it looks very muscular, and yet it doesn't work right. It's still very,
very weak. And that's because the muscle tissue has been replaced by fibrous collagen and
infiltration of fat. So it looks big. So pseudohypertrophy is not, it's fake, okay? All right,
again, muscle weakness, intellectually impaired. So I found these kids, they talk, they can talk,
then they're not severely disabled, but a little bit impaired, all right? Again, pseudohypertrophy
of the calf, waist and muscles. And again, the cardiomyopathy is a main problem in morbidity and
mortality is that heart is a muscle and the muscle has a problem working all over the whole body.
And so they do get a cardiomyopathy, usually a dilated cardiomyopathy, very, very common. All right.
So early signs is, you know, maybe just some findings in infancy. And as they get older, it becomes
more apparent, right? If you worry about a muscle problem or weakness problem, Many times we're
going to order a serum creatinine kinase because we're going to look for muscular dystrophy, right?
And this is, you know, luckily in this case, you don't have to do genetic testing, order fancy
chromosomes. Creatinine kinase is a very readily available lab and it can give you answers pretty
quickly, which is good. And death is usually from respiratory failure. Again, the breathing
mechanism, they can't swallow, they choke, they get aspiration pneumonia. Anytime you have weak
muscles, nothing works right. Your mouth, the chewing, swallowing becomes a problem. Heart failure,
again, that cardiomyopathy, heart failure, arrhythmias they can have. And so these are the things
that lead them to have more problems. They end up wheelchair -bound. Once you're in the wheelchair,
you get scoliosis, you get respiratory compromise, you don't breathe right. And so that's always a
bad thing. So you try to keep them out of the wheelchair with physical therapy as much as possible
for as long as possible, right? And these days, whereas early in my career, it wasn't uncommon to
say they'll be lucky to leave into their late teens or early 20s. And now it's, I think it's
commonplace for depending on the severity and the type of care they're getting into the 30s and 40s,
okay? But it's definitely still a shortened lifespan, unfortunately. There's the classic Gower side
where a young child, classically two years of age, where you could put them on the floor and see.
And they'll tell you, they're not the strongest kid in the world, can't really fight you off. Or
when they're playing, not very physical. And to get up off the floor, whereas kids can usually just,
pop up. These kids, they have to kind of use a certain maneuver where they kind of brace themselves
against the knee, right? And then they walk themselves up using the hands up their thighs till they
can get straight, okay? And that's obviously what we call not normal and this Gower sign. And this
picture of a kid with this pseudohypertrophy. You can see poor musculature throughout every place,
but the calves. I personally don't know why the calves get pseudohypertrophy versus other muscles,
but it's just something we've observed. Becker musculotrophy is good to hear about it. And
basically, it's still a musculotrophy. It's just in a milder form, okay? So there is some
functioning dystrophin, which is helpful. So it's the same problems, but maybe a little bit delayed
and less severe. So they might end up in wheelchairs a little later on in life than in Duchenne's.
All right, so let's move on from hypotonia and let's talk about head shapes, right? So every time
the baby comes in, we're always feeling the head, right? You see pediatricians constantly feeling a
baby's head, right? So that's one of the physical exam things that we always check out. And what
we're doing is we're trying to check out the sutures, make sure the sutures are normal, right? And
then we're checking these fontanels, okay? So an anterior fontanel is the much bigger fontanel. And
because it's bigger, It also takes longer to close. So it closes at six months or half a year to 18
months, right? So half a year to a year and a half. That's why I always tell students, try to
remember that because you're going to be asked that all the time. And you kind of have to
intrinsically know that because you're going to see infants at different times. And you want to feel
at the two-year-old, if it's still open, that's not normal, right? A four-month-old and you don't
feel an entire final, that's not normal. So you want to get a sense. Usually a good rule of thumb is
you cut it in the middle, one year of age, 12 months is when this is starting to close. You see very
commonly when they come in for the 12-month visit and they need to get their vaccines and lab work,
very commonly the anterior fatenelle is close to closing. Posterior fatenelle, much smaller,
actually feels much like a little pinpoint. And a lot of times students have trouble finding it. So
usually I say, go to the anterior fat now, follow that sagittal suture, and then you see a small,
slight depression, that's the posterior fat now. Very small, and it closes very, very early, right?
So around a month and a half to two months, it's closed already. So when they're getting that first
shot at two months of age, it's probably not even there anymore. So if you didn't see the baby when
the baby was first born or, you know, one week visit or a one month visit, you're probably not going
to feel the pulse here if I don't know, right? Always, again, pay close attention to the sutures,
right? And molding is something you should understand is that when the baby comes out vaginally, the
baby, you know, had to try to fit that big head through mom's vaginal canal. and the head, luckily,
nature knows how to get things done and these sutures can move and the head can change shape to help
the baby's passage out into the real world, right? And sometimes they have these like long,
elongated heads and we always tell parents, don't worry, it's gonna pop back into shape and the
baby's gonna have a beautiful, round, normal looking head, okay? All right, so you're always paying
attention to head shape and the size. So the head shape is the head shape. We'll talk about
different head shapes, but the size is very important. So one of the measurements we're always doing
in infants up to two years of age is always checking the head, right? Because that's a sign that the
brain is growing well too, right? Because the reason the head keeps on growing, the head size keeps
on growing, is because the brain is growing and it's pushing on the skull. And that's very, very
good. so you always make taking measurements and sometimes the head size is too small and when it's
too small could be normal but sometimes it could be a genetic problem or brain growth maybe the
brain got insulted lack of oxygen or something it could be you know an infection process you know
what we call torch infections you'll hear i have a slide later on different torch infections as well
so these are things you think about if you're measuring them and you can see that they're like
really small heads or they're what we call falling off and this would be you know a very poor sign
of poor brain growth and or head circumference that head circumference is so small in this case i'm
showing you these these ones it's it's baby's head is big right so and you know big heads are Same
thing. There could be problems or it could be normal. So sometimes it could be excess cerebral
spinal fluid and it's called hydrocephalus. And this does happen sometimes and something you have to
be aware of. But many times, especially when the infant is a normal baby, everything is going great,
physical exam is normal, sometimes you just have to measure the parent's head because they all have
big noggins. Mom and dad both have big noggins. So what's going to happen? The baby has a big
nodding. So it's called benign familial macrocephaly. Nothing to worry about at the same time,
right? If you are worried, luckily, you know, up to until the anterior fontanel closes, a lot of
times you could do a head ultrasound. So the ultrasound machine can go right into the fontanel and
actually get a great picture of what's going on in the brain. So it's a great window into the brain
when it's still open, right? And now let's talk about some abnormal head shapes. So we talked about
the size and we talked about the different shapes. So sometimes when they come out, this looks like
molding, but when you actually examine the child, you see it's more like a boggy swelling. So it's
not really the molding, like the head's misshapen. In this case, you'd feel a swelling in the head.
And the swelling, you can see, is all over the top of the head and it's diffuse and it's crossing
over the different sutures. When you feel different sutures in the brain, you feel, oh, it goes past
this suture. When that happens, you're dealing with a Kappa, right? Kappa-succinating. So, but on
the other hand, sometimes you see a little bump, right? Almost like a goose egg, you know, you ever
get, you bang your head really hard when you're a kid, you get this big goose egg on your head or on
your forehead. and I remember one time I was playing hide-and-seek and I grew up in Manhattan and
playing hide-and -seek and I was running and I ran right into one of those old into a pole, those
meters and I had this gigantic goose egg and my mom was like, what happened? Nothing. And so what
was this? This happened is it's blood accumulation under the periosteum And this happens very
commonly when the baby's coming out, they're having difficulty, and the OB doctor would use a vacuum
to suction out, put the vacuum on the baby's head, like this is the vacuum, and put it on the baby's
head to help the baby come out through the vaginal canal. Now, sometimes obviously it can cause some
minor trauma and some accumulation of blood in there. And it's subperiosteal. And so it'll stop at
the suture line. All right, so it won't cross the sutures because it happened right there. All
right, and so it doesn't cross over to the other side. Like to say, this is a sagittal suture, it
won't cross over, all right? And so nothing really to do, just reassure them. It looks
uncomfortable. And sometimes you do have to tell the parents So when all the blood goes away and
gets reabsorbed, that there might be a little hardness or calcification. Again, that will go away
over time as well. Don't know exactly when, but the body has a way of going back to homeostasis. And
that's why a lot of times our job as pediatricians is very easy because usually you just do nothing
and reassure them and things get better. You just have to know when is a problem and when most
times, luckily, it's mostly reassurance, all right? You do have to worry a little bit because you're
going to be doing the heme and lymph system in a little bit, maybe in a few months. Blood
accumulation in infants, not great, right? Because that's going to cause a bilirubin load when that
blood is being resorbed. And so the one thing that you do have to worry about with cephalohematoma
is that baby is jaundice, that yellow color they get with the buildup, the bilirubin, you know, this
is a little bit increased risk factor because this is going to kind of feed into that system a
little bit more. And you have to be a little more watchful if you have a baby with a cephalohematoma
and jaundice. Just something, a preview for your future learning. And here is a cap. And that's how
I remember it i teach your students this cap goes on your whole head not just on one side and so
that's what a cap would be like all right again more different head shapes it's important to know
because parents will ask you right parents want to know like is my child going to look like this
forever have this weird looking head shape um and it's important for us to know what what to counsel
them on so these ********* babies you know what we call when they came out too early it's very
common for them to have this long anterior posterior like that movie Aliens and long head. Luckily
most times when they grow up things kind of even out again they have hair you don't notice it as
much but it's very very common. That brachycephaly is a very short bulbous head right like Megamind
so that cartoon character is a bulbous head and sometimes it's you know it's you have a *********
fusion of the coronal suture if it's not severe a lot of times no one does anything about it but
sometimes you'll see it and and what happens that if this is fused prematurely the brain can't grow
this way anymore so it's going to grow in every other direction right the brain is constantly going
to put pressure where it can right and if if there's a physical constraint it's just going to go
other places so the brachycephaly but the most common head shape we see all the time is what we call
positional plagiocephaly the baby's head is kind of flat on one side or both sides but a lot of
times it's flat on one side and you kind of get this like kind of parallelogram head a little bit
all right um and it's really because these days the baby is on the back most of the time right so we
have a back to sleep campaign where the safest position to prevent SIDS, sudden infant death
syndrome, is for babies to sleep on the back. And we tell parents that babies are eating or sleeping
most of the time. So they're on the back a lot and it starts getting a little flat. And we tell
them, you still have to put the kid on the back to sleep. Don't worry about it. But when the baby is
awake, you can put the baby on the belly, more belly time for them to play, keep some pressure off
the head. And it's only for the first few months, because once they're like four to six months of
age, they start, you know, being more upright, and then they don't have that pressure on the head
anymore. Sometimes it can be worsening. If the kid have torticollis, you know, sometimes we have
torticollis, you wake up with that right neck and your head's kind of stuck in one place. Well,
babies can be born like that, where they have this tight sternocleidomastoid muscle. And what you
want to do is try to stretch that muscle, right? Stretch that muscle and sometimes you do physical
therapy and tell the parents certain conditions to kind of stretch that muscle. But you can imagine
if one side is constricted, the baby's always going to be kind of on one side of the head, one side
of the head, and that's going to be flattened a lot more. Again, most of the time, nothing severe
Unless, and the baby's head will pop back into shape And the biggest thing is what they look like in
their face, right? So your back of the head can look all funky and asymmetric No problem, especially
when you grow up You have hair, everything kind of evens out But you never want your face to be
asymmetric, right? No one wants a quasi-modal face and that's what a lot of this is is important to
understand in in kids on when when you have to refer or do when can you reassure and when do you
have to refer all right and i wrote something about a helmet and you see a picture of a helmet you
can put molded helmets and the helmets are molded in a certain way that it could put pressure on
certain parts of the of the head to kind of pop it back into place all right so in this case it
would probably put pressure on this side to keep this from growing, so kind of start expanding this
part, okay? All right, so the biggest problem we worry about if we see asymmetric heads is their
craniosynostosis, right? So basically, are the cranial sutures, which you saw, you know about
already, are they abnormally fused? So they should fuse in a certain way at a certain time. So if
they fuse too early, that's a problem, or abnormally. And so what I always say, usually when you're
feeling the head and sutures, it should feel like a flat plane. It should be flat. You can maybe
feel the opening, but it should be flat. You should not feel mountain ranges. You should not feel
the Appalachian Mountains in the sutures. That means the two plates are sliding together, forming
that mountain range, and that is not normal. And the biggest thing you're looking for is asymmetry
of the face, forehead, eyes, ears, right? Abnormal. Nose creases should be equal, right? And if you
do see asymmetry to the face and or you feel these sutures that make that is making head misshapen,
you want to get a 3D CAT scan or neurological consult, right? Because they might need surgery to
correct it. So in this case, the left coronal suture is a problem. And even though it doesn't show
here, you probably feel that little ridging or mountain, that little mountain range. And because
this suture is a problem, this side won't grow properly. So everything else is growing. So you have
what we call bossing of the forehead. It's kind of bulging out. It's causing the eyes, putting
pressure in the eye socket to be misshapen. Sometimes you can see the ears being downward displaced,
the nose crease abnormal compared to the other side. So you can see it's more of a It's usually just
a cosmetic issue, but it's significant. So in this case, this infant will definitely go to surgery.
These are 3D CAT scans. You ever see 3D CAT scans that we order for cranial sinusitis? It's amazing
the detail. You can see all the sutures and everything. So in this case, this is the issue that's a
problem. all right so a picture of a helmet uh kids are so cute when they wear these helmets and
luckily most of the time with positional plagiocephaly you don't have to do anything right so um i
had a colleague that asked me showed me pictures of all the cat scans gave me the full rundown and
the neurosurgeon said yes no and should we get a helmet and i really you know based on my experience
i was like no i if you're telling me everything's good head's growing normally a little asymmetric,
a little flat, the front of the face. She sent me pictures of her baby, perfect. I was like, I don't
think you need a helmet. You can just watch. And a couple years later, everything's fine. So
luckily, like I said, in pediatrics, luckily, most of the things are good, right? And this is a
picture of some surgical procedures they can do. It's really like carpentry where they cut, they
literally cut pieces of bone to give spaces for things to grow and basically cut out the place, the
things that were fused abnormally, which is in this case, the sagittal suture, okay? Here, the
coronal suture is a problem. So what do they do? You have to cut that piece so that the brain can
grow symmetrically, right? There's a couple of Syndromes, there's more than a couple, but these are
the two most popular syndromes. If you're going to be a pediatrician to hear about, I just want you
guys to hear about it. And there's cruzone and apron, okay? So cruzone is a syndrome associated with
craniosynostosis. And you can see this little girl had the problem and surgical correction.
Everything's good. Cosmetically, great. It's very, very cute, okay? And apron, a little bit more of
a problem because you're not dealing with just the craniosynostosis. a lot of times they have limb
defects. So APERT has limb defects associated with it. And of course, you have some syndactyly where
you can see these toes are not separated. Okay, can't really tell from the picture. I think the
hands are okay, but it's hard to say. Now here it looks like the hands are not okay, but maybe they
surgically fixed it. All right, let's move on to infectious problems that have neurological
consequences. So again, in infancy, if the baby was affected with something in utero, it can
definitely affect the whole body, including the brain. So the biggest thing is what we call torch
infections. This is what it stands for, toxoplasmosis. O for other, parpovirus, varicella,
tuberculosis, fibrosis, rubella, CMV, ******, HIV, hepatitis, and as I always say torches, because
you always have to think of ******** with congenital ******** as well. And you can, or, you know, if
you suspect it, small brain, maybe they have patospenomegaly, they have hearing loss, abnormal rash,
right? Where you're thinking that it could be a torch infection, you can, you can send titers, we
call torch titers to see which one it is, right? We'll talk about meningitis a little bit, Bell's
palsy, and just a little throw in. I know in my previous lecture, I talked about febrile seizures,
but I didn't talk about, there's a couple of conditions that are really strongly associated with
febrile seizures, and that's roseola. Roseola, one day you learn about, is a viral exanthemum where
you get very, very high fevers. And when the fever breaks, you develop like a non-specific rash, and
it's very benign, nothing to worry about. It's great when the rash comes out as a pediatrician, I'm
like, oh, it's just roseola and nothing to worry about. But the problem is with those high fevers
and the rapid rise of fevers, it can sometimes trigger a febrile seizure. And here in this case,
Shigella cause ****** diarrhea, GI issues. Shigella excretes Shigatoxin. It's a neurotoxin and that
decreases your seizure threshold. And when you decrease your seizure threshold So plus a lot of
times you have fever, you can get a febrile seizure from that, all right? So meningitis, the biggest
thing, you're going to learn a lot about meningitis and you can, it's a busy slide, you can read
over, everything makes sense on the symptoms they're having. But the biggest thing is, luckily in
infants, we have those fontanels. Fontanels are almost like an entrance hole into the brain, which
you can look through with a sonogram, but you could also feel, right? It should be flat and soft,
all right? A lot of students are very worried, like, if I press too hard, I'm going to puncture into
the brain. No, you're not going to puncture. It's puff dura. You're not going to do anything. But if
there's meningitis and there's intracranial pressure, it's actually going to bulge out. It's almost
like a window that you just feel. And it's, you know, classically, you document as anterior
fontanelle open and flat, if it's flat. Or if you suspect meningitis, bulging fontanelle, which is
not normal. And of course, they can have neurological signs, apnea, hyperventilation. They're not
going to act normal. Classic thing for rounds, especially when you're in the ICU, is Cushing's Triad
for increased intracranial pressure, irregular respirations, hypertension, bradycardia. Meningitis
in infants, right? It can be very subtle, but that's why we have fever if either the temperature is
very high or if the temperature is very low. It's worrisome in kids. Again, they're cranky, they're
lethargic, they're not responsive. Parents are very in tune with how the kids are just cranky,
crying all the time. And of course, vomiting, usually from the increased intracranial pressure,
apnea not breathing right, and of course, they can have seizures. So you can imagine when we talk
about febrile seizures, you have an infant, say you had an infant seizing and a fever, you know you
can see why sometimes they worry about meningitis something we can do something about but giving
antibiotics and so that's why sometimes you will see infants getting lumbar punctures to rule out
meningitis right but again remember that febrile seizures ages six months to five years so we're not
you know hopefully by six months but you have more to go with it's an older baby versus a two-month-
old if the two-month-old is having seizures and a fever you're not going to say it's a simple
febrile seizure. You're going to work this infant out, especially you're going to rule out
meningitis, right? You're going to learn about this in DPR, Koenig's sign and Brzezinski's sign. But
the biggest thing, takeaway in this pediatric lecture, is that this test is not reliable in infants
or young children, right? They may not have this sign, so don't rely on it. You can still do it, but
it's not reliable. All right, let's move on to infant botulism. I know you got a little bit of this
in a previous lecture. The biggest takeaway is that honey, okay? You don't give honey to kids under
one year of age. It can cause, those spores can cause problems in kids, okay? So most honey jars
have that disclaimer, but the problem is parents don't read the honey jars. And definitely grandmas,
who's the biggest, you know, they're so loving, they want to give kids, infants, all the good stuff.
And everyone knows honey is healthy for you And things like that But not for young children So it's
one of those things we tell parents All the time Findings that you can have That's progressive
hypotonia So it's not a kid, infant who's born hypotonic They're fine, they're doing great Six
months, meeting all the monsters All of a sudden, they're not acting right Now they're feeling weak,
lethargic Again, if you're weak, you're having feeding problems They start choking, drooling,
because they have a poor gag reflex. The neurological system is being assaulted by this toxin, okay?
And they can actually go into restoration, so it can be a significant problem. Luckily, we don't see
it that much anymore because we're just more in tune with what's going on, and we have better care,
and we have these labels and everything like that. So infantile botulism But it's always on our
radar If you see a young infant That's not doing well Again, that's part of the history Ask them
about honey Or improperly canned goods as well So some people can their own stuff And that could be
Where they're getting the botulism Bell's palsy Very, very common issue And the biggest thing It can
be from all sorts of viruses. Most of the time, we don't even work it up. We see Bell's palsy all
the time, and I never send, unless I suspect a certain virus, I never send studies in general most
of the time. And the biggest thing you have to understand is that the Bell's palsy will resolve over
time as the body just recovers. Again, the body's going to seek homeostasis, and it takes a few
weeks, But during that few weeks, you can't close your eye very well, right? And so the eye can, if
you can't close your eye, your eye can dry out, and that can cause a long-term problem. So the
biggest thing in kids, so whenever I see kids with Bell's palsy, that's what I'm focused on is that,
you know, can he or she close their eyes? They can't, so they have to wear eye patch, or they have
to use eye drops every few hours, okay? I know in the adult world, sometimes they'll give them
prednisone, but in peas we always you know less is more most of the time prednisone is is a good
strong drug and it's needed in certain cases but in this case most of the time you don't need it but
it's good to know we can give something all right uh and you can see in this case which is the side
that's affected this is side that looks uh looks fine right so it could be and this side is the
expressive side. That's the normal side. Important to know when we're talking about asymmetry.
Sometimes you see this in infants and this baby doesn't have infant neonatal Bell's palsy. Baby,
everything's good. You can see the symmetry is good in the face. There's nothing wrong with that.
It's just the mouth is a little crooked. So I just throw this in because you see it every once in a
while and it's basically a muscular problem around the mouth. And there's an absence of one of the
the muscles on one side and over time the body will would equilibrate and they will have a symmetric
spine over time all right these minor associated with cardiac anomalies it's good to know so if i
hear a murmur pay a little close attention but it's not something i do automatic consult or anything
all right let's talk about trauma and injury uh we we did a few things we We did the cephalemus
home. We did the cat putter ready. And let's talk about the, you know, the brachial plexus. You see
this picture in your dreams. I know you had a whole lecture on it. So I'm not going to go over stuff
you already know or already memorized. The biggest thing in patients, in infants, when you pick this
up, is obviously this is the history of a birth trauma, a difficult birth. and classic is this
waiter's tip pan that you know about right this is this description of what's actually going on uh
but actually in in real life the what you find is that you know they don't always have this waiter's
tip thing and you know um i i had a baby maybe four or five years ago now so at the hospital first
time everything seemed normal it wasn't really much of a description of a difficult birth history.
The baby wasn't too big. But what I picked up was this asymmetric Moro reflex. So we always do a
Moro reflex. I think you're going to get it in your DPR lecture on neonatal reflex where you pull on
their hands. Remember, babies are flexed. Here's the doll. The babies have a flexed position. You
pull on them and you just kind of let go and simulate dropping them. And when you do that, their
hands splay out, right, equal. So you pull them up and then you let go and their hands splay out
equally. So in this case, there's what we call asymmetrical marrow. You pull them up and only like
one side splays out. The other side kind of stays still. And that's obviously not normal. And one
thing you have to think about is could be a brachial plexus injury, okay? The other thing you have
to think about is could be a broken clavicle, right? So go like this and this side doesn't splay out
the way it's supposed to. Think of the clavicle or a brachial plexus injury. Right, Klumpke's palsy,
obviously a worse prognosis. Again, you learned all about this. And the biggest thing is that if you
suspect brachial plexus palsy, you always want to put your finger in their hand and see if they have
a good grip, right? Because if they have a grip, then you're most likely dealing with the herbs and
not the Klumpke's. And that's good because herbs a lot of times will resolve with some physical
therapy and clump keys sometimes doesn't. And, you know, I remember when I was a resident in the OB,
we were called to a difficult delivery. So we were ready. And while we're waiting for the baby to be
delivered, the OB doctor was like calling and hugging on the head to get the baby out because baby
was kind of stuck for a long time. And the OB definitely just really yanked on the baby to get the
baby out, right? To save the baby's life. We got the baby, recessed the baby. And I remember the
first thing, the OB doctor, once everything was stabilized over there, came over and he put his
hand, he put his finger into the baby's hand and felt the grip, right? And he was like, right?
Because there might still be, I mean, he was probably still worried. He was worried about a brachial
plexus injury, but he was really worried that this could be a clump case palsy, which is like,
unfortunately, a lot of times automatic lawsuit. So, you know, the fact that he felt the grip in the
hand, he's like, oof, probably not that, right, which is good. And the baby turned out fine, which
is great. And sometimes it's associated with a Horner's syndrome as well. Okay, you can see a baby
with a Horner's syndrome. All right, a couple of words on shaken baby syndrome. We obviously know
it's a very, very severe problem. And really it's because The baby's head is so much bigger than the
body And they have no muscles To kind of fight off the forces So if our friend shook us You know
we're strong We're not going to go boom back and forth But a baby will So even like a parent who has
kind of lost their sense For temporarily Because the baby's crying a lot They're just stressed
They're sleep deprived And they shake the baby They can cause a lot of damage You could read slowly
in this slide about what's going on, but basically you can shear those blood vessels and cause a
subdural hematoma and the eye vessels as well, and you can cause retinal hemorrhages. So if you
suspect the shaking baby syndrome because the baby's not acting right, lethargic, vomiting, all
those signs that there's a neurological problem or even seizing, a lot of times we'll get an
optoconsult And the ophthalmologist would dilate the eyes, look in, and you could see the retinal
hemorrhages. It's very, very unfortunate. Obviously, it's a child ***** case, and authorities get
involved. And I once had a dad, and he seemed to be a good guy. And one day, he just lost it, shook
his baby. And, you know, baby, luckily, had some minor damage, but recovered pretty well, which
doesn't happen all the time. Sometimes these babies are really devastated neurologically. And he
went to jail. So as part of the ancestry guidance, we talk to parents about don't shake your baby.
Just put the baby down. If you're upset, you're sleep deprived. Don't worry, the baby's crying.
Baby's not going to cry himself or herself to death. So we tell them, especially when you see,
you're always watching the parent-child interaction. Infants have temperaments too. Some infants are
very, very intense. Some are very chill, right? So those intense kids, infants, colicky, those are
the ones, you know, you want to talk, definitely want to talk a little bit more about never shaking
your baby. And you have the classic crescent -looking blood in the CAT scan, and these are retinal,
which is, you know, right? A couple of minutes on concussions. You know, concussions, we all have
experienced it, you know, watching sports. Athletes get concussions all the time. Basically, it can
cause a lot of symptoms. Your brain got insulted, right? It can be immediate, right? You know,
you're just watching football and just bang, and you can see the athlete is dazed, you know, walking
over to the sidelines. You can see immediately, like, that person probably got a concussion, right?
But it could also just be, you know, got dinged, you felt something, And then over minutes, hours,
days, it keeps on getting worse and worse. So concussion is very, it's a very gray zone. And that's
what makes it so, so difficult, right? The biggest thing is that being able to recognize the
symptoms, all right? And some of these symptoms here, you can see cognitively feeling foggy,
concentrating, difficulty remembering. Probably how you guys feel with all these lectures and
studying all the time. Emotionally labile, irritable, sad, more emotional, nervous. Again, medical
student. All right, physically, headaches, nausea, vomiting, balance problems, numbing. So you can
read this for yourself. All right, and one thing that people always forget to ask is always ask
about sleep. Sleep is very, very important, right? Are they having trouble sleeping? They have
insomnia or they're sleeping so much, they're just sleeping all the time, which sometimes parents
say. or just drowsiness. They just don't feel right, okay? The big treatment is basically physical
rest. So not too many activities at all, especially in the beginning. Just sleep and rest in a dark
room as much as you want, okay? Cognitive rest. So no constant texting, watching YouTube videos,
playing video games, none of that. You see most of these people that have concussions, you'd be
seeing them wearing sunglasses, right? Because the light bothers them. Loud music, loud noise can
bother them too. Your brain is like shaken up. It doesn't want too much issues, okay? And you really
want to get quality sleep. Back in the day, we said, you know, no activities, stay in a dark room
for as long as you can till all the symptoms resolve. Now we realize that's not normal. The body
wants to kind of get back to normal as when it can. So once they start feeling a little better, They
can do low -intensity stuff, okay? Maybe go for, like, a short walk, again, with some protection.
They can play the piano if they, you know, that's something the kid likes to do. They can start
writing, maybe watch a little bit TV here and there until they feel tired. And you'll see, they
self-regulate. They'll watch for, like, five minutes and they're like, all right, that's enough. I
just want to go back to sleep. And they slowly build up, all right? And recovery time varies. The
biggest thing is that parents, a lot of times, coaches, the student feels pressure to kind of go
back into sports, right? How do they get the concussion? Football, soccer, lacrosse, whatever. A lot
of times that's what it is. And they want to return and get back to normal. The team's counting on
them, things like that, right? And what you really have to do as a pediatrician is like, hey, hold
on. We don't want to cause more damage until your brain is fully healed. So you really have to do a
good neuro exam And then to be 100% asymptomatic So I had a kid who was putting a lot of pressure On
me to clear him for sports He got up playing soccer He wanted to get back on the field It's been a
month He was telling me all the right things And again, I can't tell whether he's lying or not
Everything seems to be okay I talked to mom, mom says everything was okay He was a teenager I
couldn't you know you again you can't tell where they're lying to you did a neuro exam and I expect
a neuro exam to be completely normal and it was except my last thing I'm doing I always do my
cerebellar tests at the end of my neuro exam and the last thing I said okay go walk walk in a
straight line tandem gate and with one foot in front of the other right just like you know when
you're when a cop is pulling you over and they suspect you drinking and driving right and he did
everything great a hundred percent normal normal exam for some reason he couldn't do the tandem gait
he was like wobbling all over the place and i'm like really are you are you joking with me you
really can't he's like no i'm trying i'm trying and he really wants to walk properly he couldn't
right so he just shows you that's luckily we did that unfortunately i had to keep him out of sports
for like another month uh maybe even six weeks until he came back he was able to do everything,
everything was resolved, and then cleared him back to sports, okay, it's more for the safety of his,
him and his brain's long-term future, at that time, teenagers think that's the most important thing
in life, is getting back into the soccer field, but, you know, we know we can have more long -term
thinking, that's, you know, long scheme, long-term scheme of things, that's super important, okay,
here's a couple summary slides, which I like to try to do for you guys, and I think the more
important points I want you guys to know lecture feedback form and por favor and then here thank you
for another session and look forward to one more with you guys maybe a couple more bye bye