Hello, my name is Dr. Adam Hurst. I'm a general pediatrician with the Clinical Medicine Department
here with a lecture on neurodevelopmental and behavioral problems in children and for school
dysfunction. so objectives here compare and contrast the diagnostic features for speech delay
communication disorders and autism spectrum disorder providing a differential diagnosis workup and
management for each defining intellectual disability along with potential causes and the workup for
a child with a suspected intellectual disability comparing and contrasting chronic tick disorder and
Tourette syndrome explaining the definition of learning disorder while describing the important
elements of the history and workup for a child with a suspected learning disorder, comparing and
contrasting oppositional defiant disorder and conduct disorder, and outlining the elements of a
history that are important for a child presenting with a behavior problem. Here's just an overall
outline for the lecture. Initially we'll just go over general developmental delays, then
communication and language disorders, autism spectrum disorder, intellectual disability, motor
disorders, which would include chronic disorder and Tourette's syndrome, learning disorders, and
behavior problems. So this chart here just being able to show the prevalence of developmental and
behavioral problems in comparison to other chronic medical conditions in children and can see that
only asthma is anywhere close to having the prevalence of other neurodevelopmental and behavioral
problems. This is a breakdown of children 3 to 21 years of age that are listed as receiving
disability through the Individuals with Disabilities and Education Act. And we can see that
approximately 30% have a specific learning disability, 20% have a speech and language impairment,
13% with autism, 7 % having a general developmental disability, delay and so a good breakdown of
these conditions and so for the first kind of half of the learning centered around this patient in
this patient case and so you have a 24 month old male come into your office for a well visit the mom
has concerns that he's not saying as many words as his sibling does and has frequent tantrums birth
history is notable for prematurity at 34 weeks of gestation and there is a family history the father
had learning problems and an older sibling has ADHD. Your exam has normal growth parameters and a
normal physical exam and while you're in the room you kind of note that the patient makes really bad
eye contact at times really doesn't respond his name and the only thing that you hear the child say
is no. The child's fixated on playing with the car and at one point when the mom takes it away after
asking several times to stop playing with it the child throws a very large tantrum. So pause for a
second and try to write out a differential diagnosis having like three diagnoses and put your most
likely first. So the differential for this patient I have an expressive speech delay, communication
or language disorder, hearing loss, autism spectrum disorder, or an intellectual disability. And now
Now often this group of disorders will always be your differential for a similar presentation. And
so as hold on to this differential diagnosis because these are the things we'll walk through for
this patient and these disorders. And so first understanding what is a developmental delay.
Developmental milestones are the neurodevelopmental laws, the things most children can do by certain
specific age. These are the sequences that provide the framework for observing and monitoring a
child's development over time. Now, when a child is outside of that range of normal variation,
that's where you say it's a delay in development. Developmental delays can be isolated, so it can
only be for one area, whether it's motor, speech, cognitive, or social, or it can involve more than
one. A global delay would involve having more than at least two domains being delayed. And now, the
important point to understand is the difference between an delay and a disorder, and that relates to
the degree of impairment and function. So how much is it impacting their day. And so it being such a
wide variation in what's considered normal within the various domains of speech fine motor gross
motor the main thing you come across as a pediatrician or the general provider is when do you
monitor closely and when do you move forward with further workup and often just close monitoring is
appropriate and providing anticipatory guidance instructions to the parents of what to watch for and
what to encourage however if red flags are present you have to proceed with a further workup and you
shouldn't delay and this breaks down a few of the general categories of like gross motor red flags
of an inability to sit at nine months would warrant further evaluation and testing. Cognitive red
flags, an inability to turn to sound or voice at six months of age. If they are lacking in single
words at 15 months already initiating further kind of testing and evaluation. The main point to
really take home though is a loss of milestones. It's always a red flag and so if a child had
developed a skill or developed a word or a phrase or these abilities and now they lose those, I mean
a major red flag to work up as correlated with genetic conditions or other underlying etiologies.
Now Now the management of a developmental delay is to intervene, and that's the key concept because
early intervention can show great progress and response to the area of delay. And that's referring
to the appropriate service, whether it's speech therapy for a speech or language delay, physical
therapy for gross motor delay, or occupational therapy for a fine motor delay. You might also need
to refer to a subspecialist, whether that's a geneticist or neurology or even a developmental
pediatrician. You're also there as a support and education for parents and to be a medical home and
that's where you can help assist in keeping track of referrals and specialist recommendations and
you're in that position to help the parent understand the overall plan and make sure that all their
needs are being met. So now moving into kind of communication disorders. And so for a speech and
language development, that being an early marker of cognitive development. And so for a language
disorder, it's a delay or deficit in the comprehension or production in language that's significant
enough to cause impairment in functioning. So delay does not necessarily mean disorder, it's again
looking at the function. And so it's important to understand, is this causing an impact in their
day? Now, these delays are often associated with comorbidities and learning problems or behavior
problems. And really having that exposure to speech matters. The more the child hears, the more they
will learn. So constantly reminding the parents to talk and read to their patient. Now, screening
tools cannot predict if a language delay will be persistent or not. However, they can catch early
issues. And now there are a few urban myths that you would hear for why some children might not be
talking at their normal age, and whether that's because they're in a bilingual household or they
have older siblings that talk for them, but those would not be true. Children should be expressing
similar sounds and words and phrases regardless whether they're in a bilingual household or they
have older siblings that talk for them and so right now we'll kind of go over about four main
disorders understanding to about five to eight percent of children how to speech language delay by
the preschool years so we'll walk through these four disorders language disorder and so a persistent
difficulty in the comprehension and or production of language. It results in functional limitations.
Usually presents as reduced vocabulary, limited sentence structure or limited conversation skills,
deficits having issues with that spoken communication and or written communication or sign language.
Usually presents as a delay in onset of words up to three years of age or, again, that reduced
vocabulary or sentence abilities. Deficits are not due to hearing impairment or due to environmental
deprivation or an underlying medical condition, so you would need to rule those out. And oftentimes
the child compensates for their inability to use words by using gestures or other body languages,
but often the child becomes frustrated or tantrums result. And you can have both receptive and or
expressive language could be delayed. The next one being a speech sound disorder. So this is a
persistent difficulty with speech and sound production that interferes with speech intelligibility
or prevents verbal communication. And so the articulation of the speech sound is impaired to the
point that they cannot communicate. And this can be very frustrating, not only for the patient,
because they can't express themselves, but also for the parent or the caregiver. And so as a
stranger, at the age of 2, I should understand 50 % of what a child should say. At the age of 3, I
should understand 75% of what a child should say. At the age of 4, I should be able to understand
100% of what that child should say. And so if they are five and I can only understand 50% of what
they're saying, the concern would be having a speech sound disorder. And now, speech sound disorder
and language disorder, both can respond very well to speech therapy after it's initiated. Next being
a child onset fluency disorder. And this being in reference to, like, stuttering. And so clinically,
it's a significant impairment in speech fluency and timing. And it affects 1% of school -aged
children and can be three times more common in boys. And again, having the symptoms of poor fluency,
poor timing, and needing a speech therapist and needing further evaluation. And the last one that
we'll talk about is for social pragmatic communication disorder. And that's an impairment in the use
of language for social exchanges. Impairment in the ability to adapt communication styles to context
or interactions, or having issues following conventional and cultural norms for conversation, and
inability to understand ambiguous languages. And so this child has difficulty interpreting what
they're saying and do, expressing themselves verbally or non-verbally. They don't understand humor
or sarcasm appropriately. It often leads to difficulty in school, and so then they get bullied or
ostracized and will have emotional problems, conduct issues. And it's important to differentiate
this from autism, and so autistic children do not want that social interaction, whereas these kids
with a social communication disorder are searching for that social interaction, they just have
trouble achieving it. And so commonly, we'll need both speech therapy and social skills therapy to
help and improve those abilities. So now for the workup and management of a speech and language
disorder, starting first with the history and physical exam. And so that would include both your
prenatal and birth history, and so looking into complications, any inter utero infections or
exposures, along with any family history of other speech or language disorders. Also, a very
comprehensive physical exam looking at growth parameters and for any dysmorphic features that could
suggest a genetic or underlying reason for their language disorder. Next would be to assess the
hearing. And so all newborns will have a newborn hearing screen, but if they present at six months
of age with speech or language concerns, you still need to refer and do a formal hearing assessment
by an audiologist to ensure that that's not the reason, despite that normal hearing screen.
Depending on what you have found as your screen of, hey, I'm a general pediatrician out in my office
and they have areas of delay or disorders, then I will refer to a speech language speech therapist
for a speech language evaluation. And that's going to be more in-depth, looking at very specifics
and helping to determine the level and the degree of the delay or the disorder. Also for me as the
pediatrician or the general provider, ruling out any other underlying disorders and so is there a
genetic disorder, do they have autism, is there a global delay or more areas of developmental delay.
Referring to speech therapists when indicated, so if the child is less than 3 years of age,
referring to early intervention or if they're older than three whether it's preschool or a school
that can do it or through a private speech therapist. Also important to educate the parents. What
are the goals? How can they work with the child at home reading and talking to their children? So
that finishes the work up and kind of the plan for a speech and language disorder. Moving into
Autism Spectrum Disorder, so this is a lifelong neurodevelopmental disorder associated with deficits
in social communication and social interaction, and it's accompanied by restrictive or repetitive
behaviors. And the prevalence has been increasing, so in 2000 it was 1 in 150 children, whereas in
2010, 1 in 68, 1 in 54 children in 2016, and most recent data in 2020 showing 1 in 36 children being
diagnosed with Autism Spectrum Disorder, and males being more common than females in a 4-1 ratio,
that's having a very increased prevalence and being able to understand and help these children and
adults with this disorder. And so for risk for Autism Spectrum Disorder, kind of going at it from
both the genetics and a biological approach to risk. So risk being if there's a genetic problem. So
chromosomal disorder, fragile X being the most common, also associated with Down syndrome or Rett
syndrome or tubular sclerosis. And a known genetic or chromosomal condition is identified in
approximately 10 to 15 people with autism spectrum disorder. Then looking too at genetics is the
heredity and having an increased prevalence in siblings up to almost a 25% chance of a second child
having Autism Spectrum Disorder. When you think about a biological risk, having older parents,
having any prenatal exposures, especially ones that would have a neurologic insult, so alcohol, your
CNS, torch infections, any drugs or heavy metals, also associated with prematurity or low birth
weight for biological risk factors. And one that has definitely been disproven, however, still is
one discussed by patients or families, is that vaccines do not cause autism. So when you look at the
autism spectrum disorder, having two kind of core dimensions, the social and the non -social, and so
focusing on these two core areas, they have a lack of social interest and for those with social
difficulties are due to problems with their ability to communicate and each of these core will have
a few more details as we'll go through also important to kind of remember previously this was
referred to as a pervasive developmental delay and Asperger's disorder birth syndrome could have
been used however right now everything is now referred to as autism spectrum disorder and kind of
those previous terms are now falling under the umbrella of autism spectrum disorder and there's now
a focus of the severity So now looking at the diagnostic features of autism, and so having deficits
in social communication and social interaction, and so they have difficulty with that back and forth
conversation. They might also have language regression, or they have reduced sharing of interests
and emotions, and so definitely have that limited joint attention. You'll have a child who doesn't
want to show any toys to their parents, or doesn't want to show them what they've been playing with.
These children also have difficulty with empathy, difficulty initiating or responding to social
interactions, being those social -emotional issues they have. Autistic will also have areas for
nonverbal communication problems, so they have poor eye contact. They don't laugh or they don't
point. And so that being a big sign for some toddlers is to point and show their parents what
they've seen or what they want to have for a meal or a snack and they aren't pointing. They have
deficits of facial expression. They also lack that social smile to others. And then the third area,
having issues with developing, maintaining, or understanding relationships. And so just difficulty
adjusting for those behaviors, having issues with shared and imaginative play, have issues making
friends and showing interest in their peers. And from the social categories, they need at least one
area that they're having issues in. And then from a restrictive, repetitive behaviors or interest,
needing at least two of these four non-social categories. And so seeing that they have stereotypical
or repetitive movements, they line up their toys or they have idiosyncratic phrases. Echolalia is
commonly associated with autism spectrum disorder. They also will have an insistence on the sameness
and have that very specific routine that if it gets broken will lead to a very large tantrum. They
get extremely distressed by minute small changes or have difficulty with transitions. Also have
restricted interests and only focus on specific the same specific things and sometimes very
preoccupied with unusual objects. And then you have a hyper or hyporeactivity to sensory input and
so indifference to pain or temperature, excessive smelling or touching of objects, sometimes a
visual fascination with lights or movements. And so to help with that diagnosis, they need at least
one symptom from each of the social categories, and they need at least one symptom from two of the
four non-social categories. I'm sorry, I might have misspoke, but need at least one symptom from the
social category, and need at least one symptom from two of the four non-social categories. And now
these symptoms have to be present in early development and cause significant impairment. And it's
also important to note that cognitive development, that most individuals with autism have
intellectual abilities in the normal range. So they have a normal IQ. So that would not be a reason
for some of their behaviors or symptoms. Now early symptoms of autism, we talked on some of these
and I think the important thing to see here is there's a lot of links and these will take you to
videos from CDC that show examples and so click through and kind of have an understanding of having
that lack of eye contact and how that looks in clinic. that lack of joint attention. So showing
areas that they are lacking in social interaction for their delay in language development, not
having social battling, having language regression, echolalia, limited imaginative play, or atypical
mannerisms as well. So with diagnosing autism spectrum disorder, early diagnosis intervention is
optimal, just like our speech and language disorders, getting a great history and also a good
physical exam while assessing for hearing and vision and ensuring no comorbid conditions. And now
screen tools from a *** standpoint are very important. There are some checklists early on, but the
one to remember is that in chat. So it's commonly completed at 18 and 24 months of age and sometimes
can repeat it at 30 months of age. And that's the main one to know. And now when you need to refer,
so it's indicated based upon your MCHAT or your screening tools, you're getting an in -depth
evaluation by a developmental pediatrician and a multidisciplinary team. Now this team might involve
a child psychologist, the speech -language pathologist, a child psychiatrists, education
specialists. And unfortunately, sometimes this in-depth evaluation can take months or a year until
it's done. The important thing to remember is don't delay your management steps while awaiting this
evaluation and formal diagnosis. Refer to the appropriate services as soon as you can. Get them set
up with speech therapy for speech delay or language issues. Get them set up with occupational
therapy if they're having issues with any five-monther, social therapy to assist and help with
skills. Don't wait on that formal evaluation. When we started talking about this, but the management
of autism is where they're getting their therapy and their support, and specifically having
educational and behavioral interventions. You'll have applied behavioral analysis, so that's more
heard as ABA. So ABA helps that child understand a specific behavior. And they look at replacing
problematic behaviors with a more functional one. And so they're working on specific goals and
specific adjustments for that patient. Whether they're getting speech therapy, whether they have
functional communication assistance, and so whether that's through the use of devices or pictures,
tablets, if occupational therapy or social skills support is helpful. And in thinking of the
management, also if a medication is indicated. And now there's no specific medicine for autism.
However, if they have a comorbid condition or symptom, can a medication assist with that? Whether
they have ADHD, sleeping issues, anxiety, are there medicines that can help them? And then you're
just kind of continuing to do what we've talked about, educating, supporting the family, being that
medical home for them. Here's a good breakdown for speech disorders versus autism spectrum disorder.
and it does kind of mention that this specific language impairment, the SLI, is in place of kind of
the language disorder that we discussed earlier and so can show kind of a breakdown between these
areas. I think one of the major distinctions lie in the social and imaginative behaviors. Children
with a speech -language disorder have that social drive, but that children with autism spectrum
disorder they lack. Children with a speech language disorder are capable of joint attention, exhibit
imitative and pretend play. They don't exhibit the restrictive repetitive behaviors or interests
that are seen in autism spectrum disorder. Now we move on to intellectual disability and previously
known as mental retardation. And so, for intellectual disability, that's that combination of
impairment of cognitive and adaptive development. And now, the more severe the intellectual
disability, the earlier it's typically recognized and diagnosed. And those with mild ID may not be
diagnosed until school for several years, depending on how severe it could be. And that's why
intellectual disability needs to be on a differential diagnosis for children presenting with various
developmental problems. And now the clinical presentation varies a lot and usually that begins with
delays in development. Gross motor delay is usually within normal limits. It's the receptive
language delays that are more common. And so for cognitive development having that reduced IQ and
again having a wide range of the severity. For your adaptive development, now we're talking about
deficits in function. So how are they conceptualizing, so their language, their reading, their
writing abilities, social skills, are they problem -solving, are they making friends, and then their
practical skills, their activities of daily living, their personal care, as they get older, are they
beginning to have deficits in any of those areas. Now for the common causes of intellectual
disability, and there's a good breakdown of a list over here, prenatal and genetic is the most
common causes, with Fragile X, Trisomy 21 being common genetic abnormalities, inter-utero
infections, so that being like your torch infections, also for fetal alcohol spectrum disorder, and
that being the most common cause of preventable intellectual disability. But unfortunately, often no
cause is identified. And now for the workup for an intellectual disability, you have the history.
Now your goal as the physician is really to ensure nothing else is there to work up or to rule out
in your patient. So with your history, you're again checking your prenatal or perinatal events. So
was their pregnancy complicated? Was the birth complicated? Do they have a past medical history of
any chronic disorders, any family history of other family members having similar issues, and then
also getting a very good behavioral and developmental history. Did they have any delays? Have they
received any therapies? Next would be the physical exam, and so looking at their overall growth
parameters, any dysmorphic features on their skin or neurologic exam, and just like in our speech
and language area, ensuring that their vision and hearing are normal. The next step would be lab
tests, and that's really only if it's indicated on the history and physical. You also can review
their newborn screen that will look into genetic or other abnormalities. But the genetic testing,
it's very specific, and it's really just a rule out. it's not that common in the case of a general
pediatrician. This is the specialist that might be looking at specific disorders. And it is
important to note that a normal physical exam does not rule out an underlying genetic cause. Now, it
could cause almost like 14% of children that have a non-diagnostic history in physical could have
this underlying genetic etiology, that being associated with like maybe a fragile X, or found after
they've done a chromosomal microarray. Also talking about the neuroimaging, really only if your
history and physical suggest it, and most commonly it's going to be an MRI as the test of choice.
And this again is looking into, is there another reason for their intellectual disability for their
symptoms. Now you can get into the assessment of the cognition and their adaptive functioning. And
in the notes section, there's going to be a breakdown of what these tests are. You don't need to
know the specific names. Commonly these are going to be done by that psychologist and helping break
down their very specific symptoms and how much of an impact it's having on their day. So now for the
management, I kind of broke it down into who is first. And so this is a multidisciplinary team. So
you as the physician, your subspecialist, the psychologist, your therapist, whether it's an
occupational or a speech therapist, an audiologist, your teacher, children with intellectual
disabilities have a team working with them and helping them. And it's also good to know is the how.
And so we have the Individuals for Disabilities Education Act, and that requires all states that
receive federal funds for education to provide free and appropriate public education for all
individuals 3 to 21 years of age. And with that, you get educational inclusion. And so the goal
being the least restrictive educational environment as possible. The child should be in the
mainstream classroom as much as their individualized education plan allows, as much as the child
allows. And that could be a whole lot or a whole little depending on the child, but they have the
safety within the system to be around others and to be encouraged to be with their classmates. They
also get an IEP, and so that's an individualized education plan. and so a lot of educational
supports working for these students and these children. Now the overall goal is for those with an
intellectual disability is to prepare them for employment, to help them build skills, help them have
the best quality of life, and some may not achieve full independence, but they might be able to meet
specific goals, and that's where that specific educational plan comes into play of are we working on
communication skills, self-help skills, what job could I have as I continue to get older. So moving
over to motor disorders, briefly touching on them. So you have our developmental coordination
disorders, stereotypical movement disorders, Tourette's syndrome, and a persistent or chronic tic
disorder. Now that developmental coordination disorder, that's just a issue with execution of
coordinated motor skills. So these are the children that are extremely clumsy, are very slow or
inaccurate with those motor skills. They can't use scissors well. They don't know how to ride a
bike. They don't participate in sports. In children with stereotypical movement disorders, these are
repetitive movements, purposeless motor behaviors. So whether that's the handshaking or body
rocking, head *******, it could be injurious. It may not always be self-injurious. but any more on
Tourette syndrome and so Tourette's being both motor and one or more vocal tics and so if you talk
about a tick so that's a sudden brief intermittent movement whether it's motor or vocal it's
involuntary but it sometimes can be voluntarily suppressed and so for a motor tic having an eye
blinking or facial grimacing, head jerking, versus a vocal tic, so grunting, clearing of the throat,
repetition of words, being those two differences. But for Tourette's being multiple motor and one or
more vocal tics. That's been present for at least a year. That being different than a persistent or
chronic tic disorder, which is just a motor or a vocal tic, not both. Now, these motor disorders, it
more impacts their life, and so they have normal delay, they don't have any other delays and have
normal gross and fine motor abilities. However, this motor disorder impacts their day-to -day life
and their activities of daily living because of this tick that they have no control over. So we'll
move back to our first patient case. And so again, this was our 24-month-old X34 weaker. Has very
few words, frequent tantrums, and poor eye contact. And so you did an ages and stages questionnaire
that looked at all their development, and they got a delay in communication. So you also had the
parent perform an MCHAP that was not concerning for autism spectrum disorder because, hey, on
further evaluation, the concerns she had, there was nothing consistent with autism spectrum. And so
this patient was referred for audiology testing and a formal speech evaluation. The hearing testing
revealed bilateral hearing loss, and the speech and language evaluation conferred your speech delay.
and EMT further evaluated for and added hearing aids and speech therapy was initiated and at 30
months he had demonstrated improvement but now we move on to our next patient and so this is a
seven-year-old male that's in second grade came in because of school problems he was born at 37
seven weeks, has a past medical history that got speech therapy for speech delay, has a family
history notable for a father with ADHD and siblings with learning problems, and has several
stressors on a social history, and so the parents divorced last year and his grandmother recently
passed away. And so on your questioning of your school problems, this little man is getting poor
grades, is having Cs, Ds, and Fs. His teacher most recently recommended he repeat the grade, and for
the last few months has just been getting in trouble in school, talking back, won't sit in his seat,
fighting with his friends. So again, pause for a second, list out a differential diagnosis, put your
most suspected one first. And so here's our differential for our second patient, mental learning
disorder, behavior disorder, ADHD, intellectual disability, mood disorder, or just related to the
stressors. And similar to our other patient, this differential diagnosis is very common in children
presenting with school dysfunction. And so we'll kind of walk through our final two outline points
here. First being learning problems and school dysfunction. And so this is not the same as an
intellectual disability, because with intellectual disability there's that deficiency on both their
intellectual ability and functional skills. Someone with a learning disability has a normal range of
intelligence, so a normal IQ, but has isolated academic skills deficits and so their academic
performance achievement on standardized tests that has an issue for individuals with our learning
disorder the scores on the tests are substantially below that's what's expected for their age
schooling or level of intelligence and again this is not due to vision or hearing problems or motor
disabilities or environmental issues. Again, non-intellectual disability, risk factors being most
commonly prematurity, a family history, and having preschool developmental problems. There's also a
very high association with a reading learning disability and children that had speech and language
developmental issues. So for learning disorders, there's several categories, each kind of with their
own subcategory and again these are like that difficulty learning and using academic skills with a
normal intelligence and so for reading learning disability it's the most common type of learning
disability or learning disorder 80% of learning disorders are in the reading category and it's
estimated five to ten percent of the general population has a reading learning disorder so word
reading or think more of dyslexia have an issue of interpreting the words that they are seeing,
having issues with word recognition and decoding, or a comprehensive, and so understanding the
meaning of what is read. These symptoms must be present for at least six months despite for
interventions or adjustments being made. And these difficulties during school-aid years might not
really come to light early on because that person can compensate for them. So it might take time
before you figure out they're having issues. And again, these difficulties are not accounted for an
intellectual disability, hearing or vision issue, inadequate educational instruction, and the other
areas, writing or math, all of these being very specific to that academic skill that they're having
difficulty in. The normal presentation of a learning disorder is sometimes not detected until very
late, because again, the child can compensate. They might memorize words rather than really learn
them, and it won't be until later grades when they get challenged more or have more work that you'll
figure out they have a learning disability. and commonly they'll just start having issues at school
it's boring that now they are joking and goofing around in class or the opposite they have to now
start spending a lot more time at home doing their homework and it's starting to catch up and they
run out of time this then leads to now I have failing grades or I don't want to go to school or I'm
starting to act out and get in trouble and now the goal for the pediatrician is to detect this early
intervene early try to stop your behaviors at this increased learning effort or the school distress
because if not it leads to the school failure now they're having to be held back a grade or they're
getting suspended or expelled because of their behavior and so trying to prevent that they're trying
to catch it early. As you walk through, again, just like all these other ones, history is really
key. This is a little different history than normal, though, because we're trying to now look at the
school and their learning. And so from a school history standpoint, how are their grades? What are
their teacher concerns? How did they do last year versus this year? What's more difficult than
other. What's their classroom setting like? Are there a lot of students or they're not? Have they
ever received IQ testing or any other therapies in the past? And do they have an IEP plan in place?
What's their school day schedule? What time do they get up and go to sleep? Are they getting
adequate sleep every night? How long is their homework taking them? What are their activities are
they doing. It can give a lot of insight into where the difficulties are occurring. How's their
development? Did they meet all their milestones at appropriate time? Did they meet any other
therapies? The social history. It can really show too if this is specific to just learning or if
it's other areas of their life that are being affected. Did they make friends easily? Do they play
in other activities? How are their relationships with their parents? And still obtaining a good
pregnancy and past medical history. Are they in utero exposures? Are they *********? Do they have
any sensory deficits? And a family history, any family problems with other learning disorders or
school problems. In this workup is very multidisciplinary and so covering both physical exam,
diagnostic testing, and psychoeducational testing. The physical exam, there's no physical exam
finding is pathognomonic for a learning disability. You're trying to look to make sure again that
there's no other underlying syndrome and disorder. So any dysmorphia, skin lesions, a normal
neurologic exam. From the diagnostic standpoint, again every child's vision and hearing should be
assessed. And only neuroimaging and genetic testing, if there's concerns based on your history and
physical and without a specific concern or indication usually these are not that helpful or
indicated and so then you get to the psychoeducational testing now that's beyond the scope of a
pediatrician and usually that's the school or a psychologist that will help perform both cognitive
assessment and achievement testing the testing for the learning this disability involves evaluation
of both components the cognitive so you you're looking at the intellectual disability and
achievement testing academic performance and accomplishing this again it's the whole team it's the
physician the audiologist the psychologist the teacher any of the therapists my main role is to
again rule out hearing vision making sure there's no other disorders or syndromes that could be
contributing to their symptoms and getting them to the right person to help them The long-term
management is very complex. My goal is to be an advocate for them, to make sure that the teacher is
listening, to make sure that they're getting therapy and receiving services at school, to make sure
that I'm a medical home, that I'm continuing to assess for other functional or mental health
problems. I can help them review their individualized education program to make sure the school is
doing what they should, and being there to continue to monitor for behavioral and developmental
surveillance. So now pivoting off of learning disorders and learning disabilities and now going to
behavior problems. I'm going to focus on two main behavior problems, so oppositional defiant
disorder, ODD, and conduct disorder. So that's CD. And so for oppositional defiant disorder, that's
a pattern of behavior above what is typically expected of defiance. And so These symptoms are
commonly trouble with authority, breaking rules, very argumentative, non-compliant. Commonly, it's
before the age of 8, no later of a presentation than early adolescence. Again, these symptoms have
been present for at least 6 months. In comparison to conduct disorder, sometimes there's child
onset, so before the age of 10, or adolescent onset. That's either after 10, and rarely is it after
16 that you'll have an onset. But for Conduct Disorder, this is now aggression towards others,
towards animals. You get destruction of property, setting fires, breaking laws, breaking serious
rules. And commonly, this is, again, been going on for at least six months, but three or more
incidents over the past year. And more commonly, this occurs in males, so 6-16% of males versus 2-9%
of females will have some sort of behavior disorder. Risk factors including kind of neglect,
psychological mistreatment, being witness to domestic violence, or parents disciplining that was
physical. Important to understand the comorbidity of these behavior disorders with other conditions.
And so commonly being associated with ADHD, the learning disorders, anxiety, along with decreased
IQ, language deficit, along with a common association to psychosocial stressors. And that's an
important one to kind of pull out to make sure, A, that you're asking the right questions with your
history. When all of this started, did anything particularly happen? Was there a loss in the family?
Was there a big dynamic change? and so that's where and that history being very important
characteristics of the behavior how often is it where is it occurring does anything trigger it and
then making sure we consider the child's development hey are they developmentally where they should
be are they having delays or significant impacts that could be contributing to their outburst also
important to look at the temperament of the child and the parents how is their relationship how do
they get along with one another how are their interactions are there any other social stressors
going on and then also that impact on functioning and academics this history is coming from a lot of
people not just the patient not just the parents that's where you're looking at teachers and getting
more information and so that's what gets you into your workup being both a parent interview, the
child interview, or teacher interview. That overall goal is just to establish, are the behaviors
normal for their developmental stage, or does it really represent a behavioral disorder? Those that
are normal for their age are usually short -lived and not causing significant or persistent issues.
The ones that continue, so now they're lasting for more than six months, or it's been over a year of
constant issues, That's where we're starting to get into these disorders. And so there's a couple
rating scales, whether it's the Connors or the Child Behavior Checklist. These can help give some of
that objective information. Your history from your parent or from a teacher can be very subjective.
Maybe they have a bad relationship, but these rating scales can give very objective, specific
information. And so they can be sometimes very helpful. I wouldn't worry about memorizing which of
these they are and what questions they ask. Now getting into the treatment of behavioral problems.
And so parent behavior management, which is something we'll hit on in ADHD as well, but that's
working with the parent. It teaches techniques and strategies to help with the child's behavior,
reinforcing good behaviors, working through instruction or critiques of what their child is doing
and using appropriate consequences. So how do they work? The biggest thing is having that
consistency, very important with parent behavior management. You can also do cognitive behavior
management, and so that's working with a team to take kind of a step-by -step approach to solving
problems. Now, medication sometimes is indicated, and that's an adjunct to behavioral therapies for
severely aggressive behaviors. And now this would be a psychiatrist helping, working with the team
to work with that patient. For example, sometimes ADHD is using stimulants, and there maybe is a
better medication for them that would help with both their conduct and their ADHD. And so working as
a team to see if there is any medication that can help with their behaviors. So we're going to come
back to our patient two as we wrap up. This was our seven -year-old male in second grade having
learning issues. We're getting C's and D's, maybe going to need to repeat a lot of social stressors
recently. It's tricky because I don't know if we answered enough questions. I didn't take a good
enough history. I think we kind of need some more information. We're going to look into ADHD, we're
going to look into learning disability, but I think that we need more history because that's going
to be the main component as you break down these learning disabilities and school problems that a
child's having. Again, here is our assessment objectives. We covered a lot of information. And
here's a super brief summary slide. I think the main thing to know is that normal child development
is very a wide range, super variable. Delays can occur in any developmental domain and it's really
important to monitor closely for developmental delays for neurodevelopmental disorders because early
intervention is key. Always consider a broad differential diagnosis and the comorbid conditions. A
thorough history is key to helping with your differential and to help with your diagnosis and
constantly providing that support and education for parents and being that medical home is very
important here are some references and again here's my email and a lecture feedback form we covered
a lot of information please reach out if you have any questions and there's some good articles and
resources on the CPG but again if you have any questions reach out and thank you for your time