--- SLIDE 1 ---
Office of Academic Affairs 
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder 
(ADHD) and Adolescent Development 
Adam Hurst, M.D.
Clinical Medicine
ahurst@nyit.edu

--- SLIDE 2 ---
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)

--- SLIDE 3 ---
Source: Course Syllabus
1. Recognize the core symptoms and various presentations of ADHD.
2. Define the diagnostic criteria for ADHD.
3. Outline the steps to evaluating a child for ADHD.
4. Compare and contrast the diagnostic criteria for the 4 types of ADHD.
5. Describe the comorbidities that are common in children with ADHD and recognize 
the need to evaluate for these.
6. Summarize the components of ADHD treatment and when each is indicated based 
on patient age. 
Session Objectives

--- SLIDE 4 ---
Epidemiology of ADHD
• Estimated to affect almost 9% of children 
• Boys are 2X more likely to be diagnosed with ADHD than 
Girls
• There is no association with a specific race or ethnicity 
• The incidence of ADHD is increased in children with 
neurologic, developmental, psychiatric, and genetic 
disorders (e.g., Tuberous Sclerosis, Autism Spectrum Disorder, 
Anxiety, Fragile X Syndrome)

--- SLIDE 5 ---
• ADHD risk factors involve an interplay between 
genetic, biological, and environmental factors  
• Environmental Factors: Prenatal Cigarette Smoke 
Exposure, Alcohol, Lead Exposure 
• Biological Factors: Low Birth Weight and 
Prematurity
.
Risk Factors for ADHD

--- SLIDE 6 ---
Presentation of ADHD
• ADHD is a heterogenous neurodevelopmental disorder characterized 
by symptoms of inattention, motor hyperactivity, and impulsivity 
that is inappropriate for developmental stage 
• ADHD presents with a different ratio of inattention and hyperactivity
• Symptoms become more manageable with age; however, up to 60% 
of adults continue to have symptoms that interfere with daily living 

--- SLIDE 7 ---
• Persistent pattern of inattentiveness and/or hyperactivity-impulsivity 
that interferes with functioning or development 
• Six or more symptoms from either (or both if combined) category 
must be present for at least 6 months that is inconsistent with the 
developmental level and causes functional impairment 
• Symptom onset must be prior to 12 years of age 
• Symptoms must be present in two or more settings (e.g., home, school, 
work, etc.) 
• Symptoms cannot be explained by another disorder 
Criteria for ADHD Diagnosis

--- SLIDE 8 ---
The Four Types of ADHD
1. ADHD Inattention: 6 out of 9 Inattentive Behaviors persists for at least 
6 months 
2. ADHD Hyperactive/Impulsive: 6 out of 9 Hyperactive/Impulsive 
Behaviors persist for at least 6 months 
3. ADHD Combined: 6 out of 9 Inattentive Behaviors PLUS 6 out of 9 
Hyperactive/Impulsive Behaviors persist for at least 6 months 
4. ADHD Other Specified or Unspecified: Symptoms are clinically 
significant but do not meet the “6 out of 9” criteria for any category
**Think “6 out of 9” for “Six Months”** 

--- SLIDE 9 ---
Inattentive Behaviors 
Hyperactive and Impulsive Behaviors 
a. Fails to give close attention to details or makes careless 
mistakes during activities 
a. Fidgets with or taps hands or feet; squirms in seat 
b. Has difficulty sustaining attention in tasks or play 
activities 
b. Leaves seat in situations when remaining seated is 
expected (e.g., leaves chair in classroom) 
c. Does not seem to listen when spoken to directly 
c. Runs about or climbs in situations where it is 
inappropriate (NOTE: in adolescents or adults this may be 
described as “feeling restless”)
d. Does not follow through on instructions and fails to finish 
chores or schoolwork 
d. Unable to play or engage in leisure activities quietly 
e. Has difficulty organizing tasks and activities 
e. Often “on the go” as if “driven by a motor” 
f. Avoids, dislikes, or is reluctant to engage in tasks that 
require sustained mental effort (e.g., homework) 
f. Talks excessively 
g. Loses thigs necessary for tasks or activities (e.g., pencils, 
tools, wallets, cellphone) 
g. Blurts out answer before a question has been completed
h. Easily distracted by extraneous stimuli (e.g., unrelated 
thoughts) 
h. Has difficulty waiting for his or her turn 
i. Forgetful in daily activities (e.g., keeping appointments, 
doing chores) 
i. Interrupts or Intrudes on others (e.g., uses other people’s 
things without asking for permission) 

--- SLIDE 10 ---
Patient History 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Physical Examination 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    ADHD Rating Scale 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Steps to Evaluating A Child for ADHD

--- SLIDE 11 ---
• Diagnosis relies on a comprehensive evaluation 
focused on patient history—there is no single 
diagnostic test 
• The perspective of both home behavior AND school behavior 
must be accounted for 
• Be sure to obtain family history, social history, and 
school history 
Steps for Evaluating ADHD: Patient History 

--- SLIDE 12 ---
Steps for Evaluating ADHD: Physical Examination
• Vital Signs: It is important to establish baseline height, weight, BP, and 
pulse (ie. stimulants can increase HR, increase BP, and decrease 
appetite to cause weight loss) 
• During the physical exam be sure to assess language development, 
behavior, and social interaction
• ALWAYS assess for and rule out hearing and vision deficits-–often 
these can present as problems with sustaining attention or impulsivity 
especially in the school setting 

--- SLIDE 13 ---
Steps for Evaluating ADHD: Rating Scales
• Often ADHD symptoms may not be present during the office visit—therefore rating 
scales are very important 
• Helps determine baseline behavior across various settings (e.g., Vanderbilt 
Rating Scale has Teacher and Parent Forms) 
• Rating Scales are based on the DSM-V Criteria and help to assess the degree of 
functional impairment 
• No rating scale should be used in isolation to make a diagnosis (ie. Rating scales are 
NOT diagnostic) 
• Rating scales only document the presence of symptoms of inattention, 
hyperactivity, and impulsivity—they do not necessarily determine if these 
symptoms are attributable to ADHD

--- SLIDE 14 ---
Comorbidities
• Emotional or Behavioral Comorbidities: Oppositional Defiant 
Disorder, Conduct Disorder, Depression, Anxiety, Substance Use, 
Intermittent Explosive Disorder 
• Developmental Comorbidities: Specific Learning Disorders, Language 
Disorders, Autism Spectrum Disorder 
• Other Comorbidities: Sleep Disorders, Tic Disorders 
**It is important to have a low threshold when assessing for 
comorbidities—not every behavior will be caused by ADHD**

--- SLIDE 15 ---
Management of ADHD
• Treatment for ADHD involves a combination of behavioral interventions, 
educational interventions (IEPs), and medication 
• Treatment is guided by the patient’s age: 
• Children Under 6: Parent Training Behavioral Management (PTBM) is 
first line
• If medication is necessary → always give methylphenidate rather 
than amphetamines 
• Children Over 6: Medication is first line; Supplemented with Behavioral 
Modifications 
• You may refer for a speech/language evaluation, psychologist, or 
developmental behavioral pediatrician for further management 

--- SLIDE 16 ---
Adolescent Development and Adolescent Care 

--- SLIDE 17 ---
Source: Course Syllabus
1. Discuss and recognize the key features and subtypes of adolescent 
development.
2. Explain the focus of the adolescent well visit: specifically, regarding a 
thorough psychosocial history, anticipatory guidance, and screening for 
risk-taking behaviors. 
3. Understand the areas of adolescent care that can and cannot remain 
confidential. 
Session Objectives

--- SLIDE 18 ---
Adolescence Defined 
• A critical period that is characterized as gradual development towards 
autonomy and adult decision making 
• Between the ages of 11 – 21 years of age 
• Early Adolescence: Ages 11 – 14 
• Middle Adolescence: Ages 15 – 17 
• Late Adolescence: Ages 18 – 21
• Adolescents are a unique and vulnerable patient population
• Unmet emotional and medical needs during this transition towards 
adulthood predict poor health outcomes and a lower quality of life in 
adulthood 

--- SLIDE 19 ---
Development in Adolescence 
• The four key areas of development that occur in adolescence include 
biological development, cognitive development, psychosocial 
development, emotional development
• Cognitive Development: Concrete Thinking → Abstract Thinking → 
Formal Operational Thinking 
• Psychosocial Development: Develop Autonomy, Establish Identity, 
Develop Future Orientation 
• Emotional Development: Emotional and Social Competence 
 

--- SLIDE 20 ---
Asynchrony in Development
• It is important to understand that emotional development often develops after the 
other areas of development 
• Example: emotional-physical asynchrony (ie. physical development occurs at a 
quicker rate than emotional) which causes adolescents to be treated older than 
their emotional stage of development 
• This asynchronous development can lead to increased risk-taking behaviors (areas 
of the brain responsible for impulse control are still developing) 
• Risk Taking Behaviors: Alcohol, Drugs, Tobacco/Vaping, Unprotected Sex
**It is very important to perform preventative counseling and establish trust with the 
adolescent patient**

--- SLIDE 21 ---
Mental Health in Adolescence 
• 20% of adolescents have a mental health disorder with more than 50% of lifetime 
cases of mental illness beginning at the age of 14
• Patients aged 10-24 years old account for 14% of all suicides
• Suicide is the 2nd leading cause of death for patients aged 10-14 years old 
• Patients who identify as sexual minorities have even higher rates of suicide and 
suicide attempts 
• Youth and young adults account for the highest percentage of Emergency 
Department visits relating to self harm 
**It is critically important to understand the emotional and physical turbulence 
adolescent patients go through in order to provide a safe and trusted medical home to 
our patients**

--- SLIDE 22 ---
• Performing a thorough psychosocial history and screening for risk-taking 
behaviors are two primary goals for the adolescent well-visit 
• HEEADSSS: Home, Education/Employment, Eating/Exercise, Activities, 
Drugs, Sexuality, Suicide (Depression), Safety 
• Whenever possible, try to talk to adolescent patients alone-–this allows 
you to establish trust with your patient while encouraging their sense of 
autonomy and independence 
• If your adolescent patient admits to risk taking behavior, thank them for 
sharing and provide anticipatory guidance based on further questioning 
Caring for an Adolescent Patient

--- SLIDE 23 ---
Confidentiality in Adolescence 
• Consent and Confidentiality for adolescents vary by state and specific service 
• Physicians should deliver confidential health services in situations involving 
reproductive health, sexuality, gender identity and expression, substance 
use, and mental health to consenting adolescents 
• Emancipated Minors can consent for themselves for all treatments 
• Confidentiality EXCEPTIONS (these must all be reported to the proper 
authorities):
• information suggesting someone is in imminent danger
• suspicion of sexual or physical abuse of a minor
• the diagnosis of certain communicable diseases 

--- SLIDE 24 ---
Summary
•
ADHD is a neurodevelopmental disorder which causes functional impairment and requires 
specific criteria for diagnosis: 
•
At least 6 out of 9 symptoms present for at least six month
•
Symptoms need to be present before 12 years of age 
•
Symptoms need to be present in two or more settings (e.g., school and home)
•
Cannot be explained by another disorder 
•
Adolescence is a unique and vulnerable transitional period for many patients 
•
The primary goals for the adolescent well visits include anticipatory guidance, taking a 
thorough psychosocial history, and screening for risk-taking behaviors 
•
Confidentiality should be expected for consenting adolescents in matters of reproductive 
health, sexuality, gender identity, substance use, and mental health 

--- SLIDE 25 ---
Question #1:
A 9-year-old male is brought into your office by his mother who states that the child has not been doing well 
in school for the past year. He often speaks out of turn and frequently stands up while doing his schoolwork. 
The patient has been sent to the principal’s office on multiple occasions for talking to his classmates during 
lessons. His grades are poor in part because the child often comes unprepared for class. The patient often 
apologizes for forgetting his materials and appears frustrated when he forgets to bring in his homework. At 
home, the patient often refuses to engage in homework and is often found playing video games when he is 
supposed to be completing his chores. Which of the following is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Anxiety Disorder 
B. Autism Spectrum Disorder 
C. Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder 
D. Oppositional Defiant Disorder 
E. Conduct Disorder 

--- SLIDE 26 ---
Question #1 Answer:
A 9-year-old male is brought into your office by his mother who states that the child has not been doing 
well in school for the past year. He often speaks out of turn and frequently stands up while doing his 
schoolwork. The patient has been sent to the principal’s office on multiple occasions for talking to his 
classmates during lessons. His grades are poor in part because the child often comes unprepared for class. 
The patient often apologizes for forgetting his materials and appears frustrated when he forgets to bring in 
his homework. At home, the patient often refuses to engage in homework and is often found playing video 
games when he is supposed to be completing his chores. Which of the following is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Anxiety Disorder 
B. Autism Spectrum Disorder 
C. Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder 
D. Oppositional Defiant Disorder 
E. Conduct Disorder 

--- SLIDE 27 ---
Question #2: 
A 40-year-old male presents to you for an initial visit at your clinic. He has no physical complaints. The patient 
currently works as a waiter. As a child, the patient had trouble in school causing him to repeat first and 
second grade. His teachers often complained to his father that he was unable to sit still in class and was 
disruptive. As an adult, the patient has bounced from job to job. His most recent job was in construction; 
however, he recently lost this job due to difficulty keeping track of the building materials. The patient admits 
he gets bored easily and admits that he often cannot help saying what is on his mind as soon as an idea 
enters his head. His family history is positive for a specific learning disorder in his brother. Physical 
examination is within normal limits. What is the most likely diagnosis?
A.
Antisocial Personality Disorder 
B.
Specific Learning Disorder 
C.
Major Depressive Disorder 
D.
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder 
E.
Intellectual Disability 

--- SLIDE 28 ---
Question #2 Answer:  
A 40-year-old male presents to you for an initial visit at your clinic. He has no physical complaints. The patient 
currently works as a waiter. As a child, the patient had trouble in school causing him to repeat first and 
second grade. His teachers often complained to his father that he was unable to sit still in class and was 
disruptive. As an adult, the patient has bounced from job to job. His most recent job was in construction; 
however, he recently lost this job due to difficulty keeping track of the building materials. The patient 
admits he gets bored easily and admits that he often cannot help saying what is on his mind as soon as an 
idea enters his head. His family history is positive for a specific learning disorder in his brother. Physical 
examination is within normal limits. What is the most likely diagnosis?
A.
Antisocial Personality Disorder 
B.
Specific Learning Disorder 
C.
Major Depressive Disorder 
D. Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder 
E.
Intellectual Disability 

--- SLIDE 29 ---
An 8-year-old boy is brought to his pediatrician by his parents due to concerns about his recent behavior. 
They complain that he often avoids doing chores around the house and he must be told to repeatedly do his 
homework. When told firmly to complete these tasks, he often objects, insists he would prefer to play his 
video games, but eventually is able to complete his homework without any difficulty. His school 
performance is slightly below average, and his teacher mentioned that he may not be reaching his full 
potential. His past medical history is insignificant. What is his most likely diagnosis?
A.
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder 
B.
Specific Learning Disorder 
C.
Normal Age-Appropriate Behavior
D.
Oppositional Defiant Disorder 
E.
Anxiety Disorder 
Question #3:

--- SLIDE 30 ---
An 8-year-old boy is brought to his pediatrician by his parents due to concerns about his recent behavior. 
They complain that he often avoids doing chores around the house and he must be told to repeatedly do his 
homework. When told firmly to complete these tasks, he often objects, insists he would prefer to play his 
video games, but eventually is able to complete his homework without any difficulties. His school 
performance is slightly below average, and his teacher mentioned that he may not be reaching his full 
potential. His past medical history is insignificant. What is his most likely diagnosis?
A.
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder 
B.
Specific Learning Disorder 
C.
Normal Age-Appropriate Behavior
D.
Oppositional Defiant Disorder 
E.
Anxiety Disorder 
Question #3 Answer:

--- SLIDE 31 ---
A 15-year-old female presents to the office for her annual well visit. She has no specific concerns and reports 
that she is getting good grades. When asked about her sexual history, she admits that she has had a boyfriend 
for three months. She does not want to tell her parents about the relationship because she knows they do not 
want her to date. She recently began to have sexual intercourse with this male partner and would like to start 
an oral contraceptive. The patient has no other medical issues and is not currently on any medications. Which 
of the following is the most appropriate initial response for you to give?
A.
“I can only prescribe you oral contraceptive pills with your parent’s consent” 
B.
“I can prescribe you oral contraceptives, but I will also have to tell your parents you are sexually active”
C.
”You are too young to be having sexual intercourse and I recommend you stop” 
D.
“I can give you a prescription for oral contraceptives, but I also recommend that you talk about your 
relationship with your parents when you feel comfortable to do so”
E.
”You should really tell your parents that you are sexually active” 
Question #5: 

--- SLIDE 32 ---
A 15-year-old female presents to the office for her annual well visit. She has no specific concerns and reports 
that she is getting good grades. When asked about her sexual history, she admits that she has had a boyfriend 
for three months. She does not want to tell her parents about the relationship because she knows they do 
not want her to date. She recently began to have sexual intercourse with this male partner and would like to 
start an oral contraceptive. The patient has no other medical issues and is not currently on any medications. 
Which of the following is the most appropriate initial response for you to give?
A.
“I can only prescribe you oral contraceptive pills with your parent’s consent” 
B.
“I can prescribe you oral contraceptives, but I will also have to tell your parents you are sexually active”
C.
”You are too young to be having sexual intercourse and I recommend you stop” 
D. “I can give you a prescription for oral contraceptives, but I also recommend that you talk about your 
relationship with your parents when you feel comfortable to do so”
E.
”You should really tell your parents that you are sexually active” 
Question #5: 

--- SLIDE 33 ---
•
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). 
https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.books.9780890425596
•
Ivey-Stephenson AZ, Demissie Z, Crosby AE, et al. Suicidal Ideation and Behaviors Among High School Students —Youth Risk Behavior Survey, United 
States, 2019. MMWR Suppl 2020;69(Suppl-1):47–55. 
•
Wolrach, Mark, John Hagan et al. “Clinical Practice Guideline for the Diagnosis, Evaluation, and Treatment of Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder in 
Children and Adolescent.” Pediatrics 144 (2019):1 – 25 and Supplement.
•
Bitsko RH, Claussen AH, Lichstein J, et al. Mental health surveillance among children—United States, 2013–2019. MMWR Suppl. 2022;71(2):1-48.
•
Rajaprakash, Meghna and Mary L. Leppert. “Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder.” Pediatrics in Review 43 (2022):135 – 145. 
https://nyit.idm.oclc.org/login?url=https://publications-aaporg.arktos.nyit.edu/pediatricsinreview/article/43/3/135/184778/Attention-Deficit-
HyperactivityDisorder?autologincheck=redirected
•
American Academy of Pediatrics. Clinical practice guideline for the diagnosis, evaluation, and treatment of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in 
children and adolescents. Supplemental information. Available at https://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/suppl/2019/09/18/peds.2019-2528.
•
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/attention-deficit-hyperactivity-disorder-in-children-and-adolescents-clinical-features-and-diagnosis#H27 
•
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/attention-deficit-hyperactivity-disorder-in-children-and-adolescents-overview-of-treatment-and-prognosis 
•
https://www.cdc.gov/suicide/facts/disparities-in-suicide.html
•
https://www.aafp.org/about/policies/all/adolescent-confidentiality.html 
References

--- SLIDE 34 ---
Lecture Feedback Form:
NYITCOM Student Feedback Form
Adam Hurst, M.D.
ahurst@nyit.edu
Office hours are by appointment – please email to set a time

