My name is Dr. Adam Hurst. I'm a general pediatrician in the clinical medicine department here today
with a lecture on attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and adolescent development. If you have
any questions as you go through this lecture, please don't hesitate to email me. It's included on
this first slide. I'd be happy to help. For Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder, or ADHD, and
that's what I'll refer to it as as the lecture goes on, I'm going to start and just cover this as
the first half of the lecture. Here are some objectives specifically for ADHD. So recognizing the
core symptoms and presentations of ADHD, the diagnostic criteria, outlining the steps to evaluating
a child with ADHD. We'll talk about the four different types of ADHD along with the comorbidities
that are common and recognizing these. And then summarizing briefly the ADHD treatment based upon
age. Now as you go through this lecture there might be some stars in the bottom right hand corner
that will refer back to session objectives. There's also some bolded and underlined parts that will
be critical teaching things. So before learning about the presentation or pathophysiology of any
disorder or disease that you come across from clinical side point, it's important to understand the
epidemiology. It helps you understand how the disease alters the world, gives us clues about who may
be at risk for it, gets an overall picture of how many patients may be experiencing this on a day-
to-day basis. In regards to ADHD, it's estimated to affect almost 9% of children in the United
States, with an incidence only increasing as more studies and more data is being collected. It's
also important to know that boys are twice as likely than girls to be diagnosed with ADHD. Now,
unlike many other disorders, there's no specific association for a race or ethnicity. However, there
is an increased incidence in ADHD in children with other disorders, whether it's a neurologic,
developmental, psychiatric, or a genetic disorder. Now, a few of these examples, tuberous sclerosis,
autism spectrum disorder, anxiety, fragile When you look at the risk factors for ADHD, the main
point to understand is there's no singular risk factor for ADHD, but actually, it's a wide mix of
genetic, biological, and environmental factors. Some of the important ones to pull out from an
environmental factor, having prenatal smoke exposure, prenatal alcohol exposure, lead exposure, all
increases that risk. From a biological standpoint, a low birth weight and prematurity are some of
the main risk factors that are commonly seen. Now this is not an extensive list, but it's just a few
of the important ones that you would clinically now getting into the presentation of ADHD the
specific definition of ADHD ADHD is a heterogeneous neurodevelopmental disorder that's characterized
by symptoms of inattention motor hyperactivity and impulsivity that is inappropriate for
developmental stage now what that really means is that we expect there to be levels of inattention
hyperactivity and impulsivity for any kid. However, a child with ADHD will have those symptoms that
exceed that level compared to other children at their developmental stage and age. It's really
important to understand that no two children with ADHD will look alike. We might say that the same
presentation on paper or on a test, however in the clinical standpoint, one child will look very
different than another child or in regards to ADHD. Also thinking about ADHD, while it's extremely
common in children, it's also very common in adulthood as well. While ADHD symptoms though are more
manageable as age goes on, there are about 60 % of adults who have had ADHD symptoms during
childhood that continue to have those symptoms that interfere with their daily living. The criteria
for ADHD diagnosis, as you'll see, just like with a lot of other developmental and psychiatric
disorders, it comes from the DSM -5 that these criteria must be met in order to diagnose a patient.
Understanding these criteria are really important. It's not memorizing this word for word, but
getting the overall symptoms and criteria. And so according to DSM-5, ADHD is characterized by a
persistent pattern of inattentiveness and hyperactivity impulsivity and or hyperactivity impulsivity
that interferes with functioning or development. Now the last part, interfering with functioning, it
might also be referred to as functional impairment, is very important because for ADHD you have to
have that impairment with your symptoms. Now you need six or more symptoms from either of the
categories in attendiveness and or hyperactivity impulsivity that are causing functional impairment
and have been present for at least six months. The symptom onset must be prior to 12 years of age
and symptoms must be present in two or more settings, and commonly that's school and home for
children. And just like with many other psychiatric and developmental disorders, the symptoms can't
be explained by another disorder. Now before I move on, a point to clarify that could be confusing
is that while ADHD symptoms must be present prior to 12 years of age, that doesn't mean you have to
be diagnosed with ADHD before the age of 12. For example, an undergraduate student who's 22 could
have no prior medical history but be diagnosed with ADHD as long as they can recall symptoms of
hyperactivity and or endotinomous that began before the age of 12. And it's also one side point to
point out for DSM-5, if you're diagnosing a patient 17 years or older, it's the same criteria. So
again, symptoms that have been present for at least six months, causing functional impairment in two
or more settings prior to 12 years of age. However, they only need five of those symptoms or more.
Now we'll go over the four main types of ADHD. You have ADHD inattention, ADHD hyperactive
impulsive, ADHD combined, which is both inattention and hyperactive impulsive, or there's the ADHD
other specified or unspecified. And we'll walk through each of those criteria need. However, the
main point is having at least six or more of the nine symptoms for at least six months. Now this is
a slide put together that breaks down the specific symptoms. So in the blue are the inattentive
symptoms, red you have hyperactive, and the yellow being impulsive. And so to be diagnosed with ADHD
inattention, you have to have six of these nine symptoms. Now, don't memorize each one of these
presenting symptoms, but just read through them, be aware of some of the common symptoms that would
be associated with inattentive type. The same for the hyperactive and impulsive. To be diagnosed
with that ADHD type, you have to have at least six out of the nine of any of these hyperactive and
impulsive types. And to be diagnosed with the combined type, you need at least six of the nine from
the inattentive and six of the nine from the hyperactive and impulsive side. For the other specified
or unspecified, while you might not meet the criteria of six out of the nine, it's still clinically
significant symptoms causing functional impairment. The main three types that seen in practice are
the inattention, hyperactive, impulsive, or the combined types. And again, don't memorize all these
symptoms, but thinking from the standpoint of diagnosing ADHD, the patient's coming with difficulty
sustaining attention and task or play activities, can't organize task activities, easily distracted,
the child that's fidgety with their hands or feet, or can't sit still, always on the go, and the
impulsive, can't wait for his turn, blurts out answers. Again, symptoms that you'll commonly see in
children, it's being all of those symptoms together, with the duration of symptoms and the
functional impairment that helps with the diagnosis. So, now that you understand the presentation,
so again, all those symptoms, the diagnostic criteria, so we need to figure out how to diagnose the
child. It's important to take the steps from a physician's standpoint because it could be something
else. And so, the main tools that you're going to use to diagnose ADHD are starting with your
history. You'll also need a good physical exam and then utilizing an ADHD rating scale. Now, the
patient history is probably the most important aspect of evaluating a child for ADHD. Many
developmental and psychiatric disorders are very different than medical diagnosis because there's
not a specific blood test or image that can help diagnose. So you really need a good comprehensive
history from the patient and the family. And so you need behaviors at home and at school or the
other common setting the student is found in. Sometimes too, if they are very involved with sports
or another activity, getting that tutor, that teacher, that coach, that input as well can be super
helpful. Getting into a thorough family history, a very in-depth social history along with that
school history as you're walking through the evaluation. And when you ask about the child's behavior
both at school and at home, because again ADHD requires the symptoms to be present across two or
more different social settings. A few points with the family history, because commonly there will be
other family members that have a history of ADHD, learning disabilities, or mental illness, whether
it's anxiety or depression, and so getting a good family history. From the social history
standpoint, trying to see if there's any recent stressors or sudden family changes, trauma, sleep
issues that could be a trigger or be causing some of their symptoms. And from a school history
standpoint, trying to see to what's happening at the school. Are they having worsening grades? Are
they having sudden behavior issues, suspensions, behavior problems? Are they just disruptive in
class? Trying to get some more details on the school issues that the patient is having. Now, as you
move on to a physical exam, it's important to help rule out other potential diagnoses that could be
contributing or causing the symptoms. It's also very important from a baseline standpoint if it is
ADHD. And so getting a good set of vitals, so having a good height, weight, blood pressure, and
pulse. Now, as you would learn about their treatment, if the patient is diagnosed with ADHD, first
line would be stimulants, depending on their age. And those stimulant medications can increase their
heart rate, increase their blood pressure, decrease their appetite, and cause weight loss. And so
having a good baseline prior to the initiation of treatment is very important. Physical exam can
also help you rule out other conditions or disorders that could be contributing to those symptoms.
And so assessing their language development, How is their behavior, their social interaction on your
exam? Always assessing for hearing and vision deficits because having a vision disorder or a hearing
deficit can present with those problems, causing issues of sustaining that attention or impulsivity
especially in a school setting. So from that physical exam standpoint, having those good baselines,
being able to rule out other conditions, making sure that their thyroid is not enlarged, that their
heart is appropriate, the rhythm, the rate, having a good overall physical exam can help rule out
disorders and ensure that before you initiate treatment and as you continue to help your patient
that they're set up for success. final step would be the utilization of an ADHD rating scale now
there's several different types of ADHD rating scales and because your ADHD symptoms aren't going to
show up in the office visit that you have 10 or 15 minutes to walk through all the extensive history
and the thorough physical exam the rating Scale can be super helpful to give the parent some time to
think back and record the symptoms and record the impairment that's going on. One of the common ones
is the Vanderbilt Writing Scale, it has both a teacher and a parent form. And so in clinic you
provide the parent with both of these, the parent can fill it out in the room and give it back, but
the teacher will get it and ideally mail it back, fax it back, give it to the parent. But getting
that thorough history from multiple settings to help with your diagnosis. Now those rating scales,
whether it's the Vanderbilt or the other types, are based on that DSM-5 criteria and help assess the
degree of the functional impairment. But the main point to know is rating scales are not diagnostic.
There's no rating scale that should be used alone to make the diagnosis. It's your history, your
exam, it's these scales that help clarify the criteria and in multiple settings that help with the
diagnosis. The rating scales will help document those presence of symptoms. They can also be helpful
to reference back after treatment is initiated to look back and see what the symptoms were and are
they getting better, are they worse, is that impairment better? or is the impairment not improved
with your treatment. So as we move into what common comorbidities can be found with ADHD, most
commonly it's associated with other emotional or behavioral comorbidities, oppositional defiant
disorder, conduct disorder being some of the most common, depression, anxiety, substance use or
*****, intermittent explosive disorder. From developmental comorbidity standpoint, specific learning
disorders are commonly found, along with language or speech disorders and autism spectrum disorders.
And sometimes you can also have a sleep disorder or a tick disorder. I think it's the main point
down here, it's just important to have a low threshold when assessing for comorbidities, because not
every behavior will be caused by ADHD. Now, that does not mean your patient doesn't have ADHD, but
maybe the most worrisome symptoms the patient and the parents present with could be because of
comorbidity along with the ADHD. While this is just a sample list of some common comorbidities, you
don't have to memorize each specific one, but remembering that oppositional defiant disorder can be
found in approximately half a children with combined type ADHD. And so some of these can be very
common in our patients with ADHD. Now, we'll start with just the very overall goals of management
with ADHD. You're going to get a separate lecture that goes into the specific pharmacological
management. But for this lecture, just kind of going through first-line treatments based really upon
the patient's age, which almost always includes a combination of behavioral interventions,
educational interventions, and likely medication. So if your patient is under six, they should
always be treated first with parent training behavioral management as the first line approach. Now,
PTBM or parent behavior therapy or parent training is a program that allows parents to become
trained in behavior therapy. They help them understand the child's behavior and manage it with
appropriate coping strategies. It helps a lot with that child to have success at home and to pass
those tips on to the teachers. So to help with school, help with home, help with those
relationships. However, if the parent training and behavioral management alone is not successful,
the child can be prescribed medication. If they're under the age of six, it's important to remember
that methylphenidate would be the first line rather than an amphetamine medication at that age. Now,
if your children is over the age of six, medication is the first line, and a stimulant medication is
the first line therapy of choice, but often that is supplemented with various behavioral
modifications, and whether that's parent training, behavioral management, or counseling, it's
variable based upon the child and what the other symptoms and history reveals. What the important
part is is having good communication, being there and to have good goals with the patient, the
family, passing those on to the school, so that way you can have effective management And commonly,
it's a team approach, especially with a lot of pediatric behavioral or psychiatric disorders that
you're getting a psychologist, maybe a developmental pediatrician involved, if you are having
unsuccessful treatment with medications, if there's comorbidities involved, if there's a language or
speech impairment, using therapists to help in their day-to-day symptoms. Okay, so that would
conclude the half of the lecture about ADHD, and again, we went through the core symptoms,
presentation, your diagnostic criteria, your evaluation, so your physical exam, your history that's
very in -depth, and any kind of rating scales. You all understand the four different types, along
with the common comorbidities, and then a very simple, brief, general overview for ADHD treatments.
So as we move on to that adolescent development and adolescent care portion, again, we've covered a
lot and this will kind of just be a very overview of adolescent development. So some objectives for
this part of the lecture is recognizing the key features and subtypes of adolescent development,
explaining the focus of adolescent well visit. So, going through the psychosocial history,
anticipatory guidance for these age groups, and screening for risk-taking behaviors. And also
understanding the areas of adolescent care that can and cannot remain confidential. So, adolescence
is defined as a critical period of growth that is characterized as a gradual development towards
autonomy in adult decision-making. Now, you can break adolescence down. Now, these ages are not a
very exact number, it's a range, and so commonly it's between the ages of 11 and 21. So having early
adolescence around the ages of 11 through 14, middle adolescence ages 15 to 17, and late adolescence
being around the ages of 18 to 21 years of age. Now, it's not important to memorize the exact age
ranges, but have that general idea of the stage that they're in. It's also really important to
understand that adolescents are a really unique patient population. They are very vulnerable and
have a wide range of needs from unmet emotional or medical needs and that transitioning towards
adulthood is very challenging. But as they make that transition towards adulthood, they can help
predict poor health outcomes. How is their quality of life going to be in adulthood? And so being
able to have that good, safe medical home for your patient is super important. And helping that
adolescent grow and adjust is helpful as the years go on. Now, for the four key areas of development
that occur in adolescence, having biological development, cognitive development, psychosocial, and
emotional development. And we'll briefly go through three of those, biological development being
growth and development. So, going through puberty, those pubertal changes, this lecture mostly
focusing more on the cognitive, psychosocial, and the emotional development. From the cognitive
development, it's an adjustment in their thinking. And so early adolescence, they have that very
concrete thinking. The patient's ability to think only about things that they have had direct
contact with or direct knowledge of. So they will only be able to solve a problem with real objects
or facts that they know. There's really no hypothetical thinking in those concrete brains. As they
develop, they now become abstract thinkers. So now they can think when they have that ability to
imagine things that they've never yet seen or experienced, and so can start thinking out of the box.
And then that continues to transition into starting to have reasoning skills. Concrete thinkers
aren't often able to understand the consequences of their actions, and so therefore wouldn't be able
to link the cause and effect of their health and the behaviors that they're doing. As they continue
to transition into that abstract thinking, they slowly start to develop the ability to explore the
possible consequences of their actions through that hypothetical thinking, through a logical thought
process. so now that they're having to be able to think cause and effect now they continue to grow
up and start having formal operational thinking and so that really requires a big step and it's
called metacognition it's really that ability to think about thinking late adolescent patients are
often able to think about what they're feeling and how others perceive them it's an important aspect
of development And if this stage of thinking develops improperly, which commonly it will, it can
cause many adolescents to develop that imaginary audience. And so an imaginary audience, the patient
thinks that everyone is focused on them and thinking about them. It's a very egocentric way of
thinking that they can be very detrimental in the already very sensitive stage of development. So as
you think about your own transition from being that concrete, fixed thinker to being able to have
abstract thinking, thinking out of the box, and how that helps you form that operational thinking of
this caused this and how I'm perceived as you go through that adolescent stage, it takes a long time
to develop that process. In addition to cognitive development, adolescent patients will also go
through psychosocial and emotional changes. Psychosocial development often entails developing
autonomy, establishing one's own identity, developing that future orientation. Developing autonomy
can be very broad. Commonly though, there's two common examples in developing that emotional and
economical independence. And so understanding, hey, maybe they got their first job and now they can
start growing and figuring out how to use their first paycheck and they have their first
relationships that maybe get broken up and dealing with that emotional independence. as they have
that independence, that autonomy they're also learning to establish their identity commonly that's
characterized by a building of self -concept self-esteem, self-esteem, experimentation and
rebellion. Self-concept referring to the patient's perception of their self. How are their talents
their goals? What life experiences are being remembered by them, what's their participation in
different ethnic, religious, ****** identity groups. On the other hand, self-esteem is how the
patient assesses their own self-worth. And so you have that self -concept of what's that perception
of their self, whereas the self-esteem is what's their self-worth. Future orientation relates to the
patient's goals for their future career that they're developing but this time in adolescence is
often when patients begin to establish the values that are important to them in life and so if you
think too those are very important huge aspects in developing a person and that patient is going
through in adolescence and so lastly emotional development primarily entails development of
emotional social confidence. Emotional confidence referring to the patient's ability to manage their
own emotions and identify and label their own feelings. That can be very challenging for adults. And
so thinking, hey, it's going to take a long time for them to learn that. Social confidence, on the
other hand, refers to the patient's ability to relate with others and identify the feelings of
others. So if you take a second, there was a lot that I just talked through this slide. That's
adolescence It can be a whole lot, and this is just a general idea of those developmental phases
that are going through those years. Now that we've gone through the various areas of development
that occur during adolescence, it's important to note that these different areas don't always
develop synchronously. Often, emotional development lags behind the others. And most commonly, it's
an emotional-physical asynchrony that often causes adolescents to be treated older than their
emotional stage of development. So thinking about children now developing physically, that they look
like teenagers, or teenagers have developed and they look like young adults, that they're treated
like a young adult or treated like a teenager. However, that just leads to increased risk -taking
behaviors. And whether that's drugs, alcohol, vaping, unprotected ***, if they're being treated as
older individuals, however, that emotional development has not matured, increased risk for all the
risks of adolescent and teenage years. Now, that's what makes an adolescent visit very important
because you can really establish trust where they will listen to your preventative counseling,
they'll listen to your anticipatory guidance on what they should and shouldn't be doing at this age
and this stage of their life. Now, with adolescent being a very unique and vulnerable time period
for our patients, unfortunately studies have found that over 20% of adolescents have a mental health
disorder and more than And 50% of lifetime cases of mental illness began around the age of 14.
Patients aged 10 to 24 years old count for 14% of suicides. And suicide is the leading cause of
death in patients aged 10 to 14 years old. That doesn't just make us sad as providers trying to be
proactive and talking about our adolescent mental health and our adolescent development. Our youth
and young adults account for the highest percentage of emergency department visits relating to self-
harm. These points just show how vital it is to both understand the emotional and physical
turbulence that our adolescent patients are going through and that we have to be there to provide a
safe and trusted medical home to our patients so that they know where they can go. So now that you
understand the turbulent period of adolescence, you can help us understand now as a physician, how
do we approach that? And the main goal is building that relationship, getting a good history,
understanding what your patient's going through. And so taking a thorough psychosocial history and
screening for risk-taking behaviors are two primary goals of the office visit. You can memorize that
mnemonic heads, so covering their home situation, home environment, education, employment, how are
they eating, are they exercising, what activities are they partaking in, are they using any drugs,
what's their sexuality, are they having any suicide or depressive symptoms, and are they safe. Now,
when possible, it's really nice to talk to that patient alone. That helps you establish trust with
your patient while encouraging that sense of autonomy and independence that they're growing inside
themselves. Now that makes it a conversation with family, whether that's a grandparent, a parent, a
step -parent, being able to ask that there's permission to talk to their patient alone to help build
that trust. And that's the rationale. I like to interview my teenager patients without a parent in
the room so that way they can feel safe to answer the questions truthfully, even if the parent knows
all of it. And so establishing that early on in your well-child visits and your well -teenager
visits so that way it's understood when you get to a psychosocial history that the parent or
guardian will be stepped out so you can talk to the patient alone. You've gotten that thorough
psychosocial history and given that patient a trusted space to communicate with you. You also want
to screen for risk-taking behaviors, so making sure to ask for any type of risk -taking behavior,
but also thanking them. Thank you for sharing. Thank you for telling me these things. Provide
anticipatory guidance when it's appropriate, And now that's when you're giving that information
about the benefits of healthy lifestyles, healthy practices, that's going to promote the prevention
of disease, of injury, especially in teenagers. And so helping them understand the potential that
those behaviors can cause on their health, on their future. Now a final point about adolescence is
confidentiality. And so we talked about the range, and this can be anywhere between 11 years of age
up to 21 years of age. So providing a whole lot between those ages. And so being able to understand
when am I having to provide this confidentially, what is age of consent, and that varies by state or
by the service that you're providing. And so, making sure that you're aware in your state of what
situation and what criteria is met with consent and confidentiality. Physicians should deliver
confidential health services in situations involving reproductive health, sexuality, gender identity
and expression, substance use, and mental health to consenting adults. And now remember that
emancipated minors may consent for themselves in all manners of treatment. And so while you can
provide a confidential source for your patient to disclose information regarding those criteria,
there are some exceptions that mean you have to report to the proper authority. And so if your
patient discloses suggesting that someone's in imminent danger, if you suspect because of the
history any ****** or physical ***** going on of that child or another individual that they
disclose, you have to break that confidentiality. Or if it's a diagnosis of a communicable disease,
you have to disclose that confidentiality. And so while it needs to be a safe place for your patient
to disclose information, if they reveal something to you and you have to report it, it's helpful to
tell them beforehand. Unfortunately, I have to tell someone about this and making sure that they
know and understand why so that way you're not breaking their trust and that way they can continue
to disclose information to you. But there are some exceptions to be known. So we got through
adolescence, which is a very wide range, and now just kind of going through a few key points of the
lecture. So we covered ADHD, so ADHD is a neurodevelopmental disorder that causes functional
impairment and requires specific criteria. So having at least six of nine symptoms present for at
least six months, symptoms need to be present before the age of 12 and symptoms need to be present
in two or more settings and also cannot be explained by another disorder and then we covered our
adolescence and so that unique and vulnerable transitional period for our patients and that primary
goal of adolescent their well visit is anticipatory guidance it's getting a thorough psychosocial
history screening for risk-taking behaviors, building that trust in that relationship, and then
briefly touched on confidentiality and when it should be expected for consenting adults. We have
confidential in relations to reproductive health, sexuality, gender identity, substance use, and
mental health. So, I've, there's a few questions here that we could just walk through, um, within
the notes, the answers are provided, um, and so, but if you come across any of these questions and
it doesn't make sense, please reach out. I'm gonna click through these, but again, please just reach
out if any of these, um, don't make sense of what that rationale is. and here are some references,
but the lecture feedback form and along with my contact information. So please reach out and ask me
any questions. Hope you have a good rest of the day.