Hello, everyone. I'm Dr. Dusha Cummins, a faculty member on the Arkansas campus. We will be
discussing the pharmacologic management of ADHD during this session. I have included on your slide
set my email address and the phone number to my office. You're welcome to reach out to me at any
time if you have questions. I'm glad to speak with you in person over the phone via email or set up
a Zoom session. so you have already reviewed the objectives for this session I will add that this
topic is a great review of some other pharmacologic concepts which you have discovered elsewhere and
so I hope this is a good opportunity for you to review some things as well to tie new concepts
together we do not have a lot of drug therapies to discuss it discuss so I want to make sure that
you are aware of key differences. It is very important with this patient population, as with all
conditions, that we have a good understanding of drug therapies and their adverse effects because it
is the mechanism of action and the adverse effects which really distinguish these medications from
each other when we look at the classes used for ADHD. I've included how this topic maps to
blueprints for both USMLE and for Comlex, this is just for your information. So let's get started. I
will start by emphasizing that pharmacotherapy for managing ADHD is only one treatment modality.
Medications alone may not be sufficient to obtain the intended outcome or reach desired goals of
therapy. It's easy to think about drug therapy only with this condition, but other components of
therapy include psychosocial stimulants such as behavioral therapy and training interventions. These
other therapies are particularly important, especially for young patients such as four to five-year
-old patients in whom we may not want to start drug therapies just yet. However, these additional
therapies can be used in patients of all ages. I won't go into great detail, but I will describe
some of what these therapies involve. Behavioral therapy tends to involve training of the adults who
interact with the pediatric ADHD population, whether there's caregivers or teachers. This helps
these individuals learn skills to help manage the patients. Training interventions are targeted
towards skill development in the patients themselves and revolve around feedback over time. The
third bullet under psychosocial treatment includes mindfulness, cognitive training, and dietary
modifications. These other therapies have not been systemically evaluated and analyzed, but you do
see them mentioned in the literature, and I wanted to include them for completeness. Some key
considerations in using drug therapy. Keep in mind we're trying to control symptoms and behavior in
these patients that impair learning and development. Thus, goals are very much individualized to
specific behaviors, academic goals, and social targets. To meet these goals, it's important that we
identify before patients start drug therapy what the goals actually are, because that is the only
way to really determine if we're meeting our goals once drug therapy is initiated. One of the take-
home points I hope you gain from this lecture is that response to medications is not a paradoxical
effect. We use the term stimulant quite a bit, and we'll talk about that a little more. This can be
confusing because stimulant sounds very counterintuitive when we're talking about a condition in
which patients look hyperactive. We're going to delve into the pharmacological understanding of why
the drug classes we use to treat ADHD are thought to work. But it's not a paradoxical effect.
There's a proposed mechanism based on our current understanding of how these drugs work. And I
highlight this because you may find yourselves in a position to educate others on this mistruth of
the paradoxical effect. So in order to understand these concepts, we need to discuss the default
mode network, which is sometimes referred to as our default attention mode. This is a network
between various parts of our brain. More specifically, the connections are between the prefrontal
cortex, which controls our decision -making and executive functioning, and our medial parotel lobe
and posterior cingulate, which help us with integration of information and memory recall. Normally,
this default mode is active during a resting state. For example, if you're sitting in a chair
thinking about what you're going to do for the day or whenever you're not actively engaged in a
task, this default mode is active. One way to think about it is as a normal background active state.
Typically, when we switch from a resting state to attend a task, this default attention mode is
inhibited. The background activation gets turned off normally. Our understanding is that there is a
lack of inhibition in the ADHD population that causes them not to suppress this background
activation state when they need to focus. Thus, the consequences look like inattentiveness and or
lack of impulse control. So to summarize, one way to think about it precisely is that there's a
failure of an inhibitory system in these patients. Their inhibition of the default attention mode,
for whatever reason, is not there. So how do we help this pharmacologically speaking? The proposed
benefit of the medications is that they work by increasing dopamine and or norepinephrine. And by
increasing these neurotransmitters, we help reestablish the connections that restore this inhibition
that is lacking. More specifically, it's thought that dopamine helps restore the overall inhibitory
effect that is lacking and norepi strengthens the signals between the areas of the brain within the
network. I know you've seen this biosynthesis flowchart before. Keep in mind, just to help you with
this topic we're discussing now, that dopamine and norepi are structurally similar. And when you
look at this closely, you see that they only differ by a hydroxyl group. I mention this because
we'll discuss neurotransmitter transporters, which, again, you've also discussed that elsewhere. Our
images show neurotransmitter, excuse me, transmitter-specific transporters. However, the
transporters are really not that specific and the type of neurotransmitter they recognize and take
up, for instance. And it goes back to this structure. When we look at dopamine and norepinephrine,
they're very, very similar. So these neurotransporters, even though we call some neuro
epitransporters and some dopamine transporters, they can also transport the other neurotransmitter
because, frankly, they're not that different when you look at the structure. And we can talk about
the treatment of ADHD without revisiting this image as well. Just as a quick review here, and I know
you know this really well, tyrosine is taken up into the presynaptic neuron, converted into
dopamine. which is then taken up into the storage vesicle, where it's converted into norepi. And
then norepi is released into the synapse when an action potential comes along and this vesicle fuses
with the surface membrane. Norepi is normally taken back up into the presynaptic neuron via these
transporters that I just mentioned. And as you can see, there are several medications slash
substances which can impact, i.e. block the transport of the neurotransmitter back up into the
presynaptic neuron. You often see ******* on these images as a classic example, but there are other
things besides ******* that have similar properties, such as tricyclic antidepressants, and as we'll
talk about later, methylphenidate. So even though our classic diagrams like this include *******,
For our purposes, we're looking at a medication such as mentholfenidate, which we'll discuss in a
little bit more detail. So let's look at this in a different context, which will hopefully help you
via a different route. This is another image you've seen before, this flowchart. This will help us
revisit, remind ourselves about some adrenergic agonists and their subfamilies. This is from the
classic pharmacology textbook Goodman and Gilman's. I've taken the liberty of adding on my version
of this, the term or the word relative, relative classification. And this is because if you look in
other references, you may see some slight differences as far as mechanisms of some of these
medications listed. However, by convention, we typically use this classification. And so I'm
sticking with it. So if we look on the left, we have the direct acting category. And basically, that
means that each of these individual agents only act at specific receptors. The selective direct
acting agents agonize just alpha-1, alpha-2, beta-1, et cetera. An example of this is phenylephrine.
The non-selective direct acting directly work on more than one receptors, such as alpha -1 and
alpha-2. So direct acting is one side. we've got indirect acting on the far right, and there are a
few substances that have mixed properties. So we will be talking about today the indirect acting
medications, specifically the first two of the four listed releasing agents, which include the
amphetamine family, and then the re-uttake inhibitor, specifically methylphenidate, which isn't
listed, but this is the category in which it falls. So let's conceptualize this using some yet more
images. As we discussed earlier, if we look at A on this slide, this is a typical synapse. And so if
we look at these little red dots in the synapse, these represent a typical amount of the
neurotransmitter norepinephrine that is normally released into the synapse when an action potential
comes along. If we jump down at C, this is the illustration for drugs that block the reuptake of
neurotransmitters such as norepinephrine. And so if you look at the volume or the amount of little
red dots in the synapse, it's more than what we have in a typical state up in A. And so this is a
representation of medications that block reuptake, and therefore you have more neurotransmitters in
the synapse to exert its effect down the road. So let's go back up to B. B is an image, a
representation of our understanding of how the amphetamine family works. So the amphetamines have
multiple mechanisms, and they ultimately cause more release of neurotransmitter into the synapse,
but they have a couple different ways they do it. One of the things that is interesting about the
amphetamine family is that they are called pseudosubstrates and so they can both block the reuptake
of neurotransmitters at the transporters and they also themselves can be taken up into the
presynaptic neuron and so if you look at this the little black dots are the amphetamine drug and so
some of it gets taken up into the transporter it can either block it or it can be taken out by it
which is interesting but when the medication is taken up into the presynaptic neuron, the
amphetamine then enters those storage vesicles and displaces the little red dots, which remember is
norepinephrine in this slide. So there's more norepi out in the outside the storage granule. And
then we've got another process called reverse transport, where the norepinephrine goes back. There's
so much of it inside that presynaptic neuron that it flows out of the neuron back into the synapse.
So we'll summarize this later, but there's basically three mechanisms tied to amphetamines. They
block the reuptake of norepi at these transporters. They themselves are taking up into the neuron
and then into the storage vesicle, displace norepi, and then norepi goes back out via reverse
transport. So a little complex, but multiple steps. And I wanted to review that in detail. So
hopefully you're clear on the mechanism for amphetamines. It definitely shares one property with the
methylphenidate class, but the amphetamine family has additional pharmacology. So a point of
emphasis, when we talk about the stimulants in the treatment of ADHD, we're talking about two
families of medications, basically the amphetamine family and then methylphenidate. When we look
over the decades of drug development, there's a really, really long list. I certainly don't expect
you to memorize this, but I just want to demonstrate there are a lot of different products that have
been developed over time. However, when you look at the actual ingredients, they're either they're
not that many medications. There are a lot of stimulants, a lot of amphetamine derivatives,
derivatives and several methylphenid derivatives. but there's not nearly as many as what it looks
like on this slide because a lot of these are different versions of the same thing, if you will. So
let's look at a case. This is TJ. He's an eight-year-old boy who's in the third grade. He was
recently diagnosed with ADHD after his teacher noticed that he does not follow through on task. He's
easily distracted, very forgetful, and does not listen, seem to listen. Social and behavioral
interventions have been initiated at home, and school. However, the decision has been made to begin
pharmacotherapy since he continues to struggle. What is a reasonable recommendation? So, we will
start by discussing the stimulant class. We have two overall classes. We have the stimulant class,
and then we have the non-stimulant class. So, stimulant class to review first. As I've already said,
the stimulants include the amphetamine family, and then methylphenidate. The stimulants are
considered first -line therapy because they work very well. I posed the question in your CPG, what
is a stimulant in the context of ADHD? And if I had asked you this a month ago, you may have
answered that, well, caffeine's a stimulant or anything that keeps you awake is a stimulant. And
that's a general lay definition. However, by convention and in the pharmacology world, when we talk
about stimulants and the management of ADHD, we're referring to the amphetamine family meds and
methylphenidate. So it's not a term that is used to reference a mechanism of action, which I
understand is a bit confusing. Stimulant is historically used to refer to these two families of
medications in the treatment of ADHD because they have ***** potential, which we'll talk about here
shortly. So don't let this confuse you. Recap, the term is not necessarily tied to mechanism of
action, but by convention refers to amphetamines and methylphenidate. Again, these are considered
first line therapy. The exceptions would be if you have a patient with certain comorbidities, which
we'll also discuss. us. Approximately, when we look at response rates to the stimulant class, we see
approximately 40% of patients respond to both the amphetamines and methylphenidate. However, another
40% only respond to one or the other. So what this means clinically is that there may be a trial and
error period to find the best medication for a patient. And there's some very rational examples why
there are differences. It could be pharmacogenetic differences, for instance. Thus, it's worth
exploring different options in patients. Even if you stay within the same family of treatment
options, patients may respond to one medication and yet not another. And last point here, ADHD
subtypes do not necessarily predict response to specific agents, such as inateninous itself doesn't
necessarily, you don't see a better response with one versus the other. So general considerations
with stimulants, again, this includes amphetamines and methylphenidate. There are several
formulations of both of these available. Again, you're not expected to memorize all this, but you
are expected to know some general pros and cons of when you might use one over the other, such as
immediate release products versus delayed release. Immediate release products have a benefit of
dosing in smaller doses for younger children. A downside, however, since they're immediate release
is that they are short-acting, so you may have to give a second dose during the school day. Delayed
release formulations have the benefit of less frequent dosing. However, they may last longer than
needed, and some patients may have their sleep impacted. Excuse me. there are some products that
have a blend of immediate release plus delayed release there's a transdermal delivery system there's
a suspension so obviously we've got several options and I don't expect you to memorize all these but
to understand you know some of the situations where you might prefer one over the other so let's
start with a more specific conversation about amphetamines. I use MOA for mechanism of action. It's
a little interesting or confusing because amphetamines refers to a drug class, and there's also a
specific drug amphetamine. So just keep that in mind. As I've already referenced, the amphetamines
work by several mechanisms, but they ultimately cause more dopamine and norepi to be available in
the synapse By those three mechanisms I mentioned earlier, displacement from presynaptic vesicles,
reverse transport of norepi, and then a lesser effect, but it's still there, the blockade of the
reuptake of dopamine and norepi via the transporters. Note that there are different isomers of
amphetamine, and it's believed that the D isomer is the one that is more potent in the CNS, which is
where we want it to work. that L-isomer is associated with more cardiovascular actions. I highlight
this because this partly explains one reason why we have so many formulations of amphetamine.
There's a pure dextroamphetamine formulation that's available. There are some formulations that have
a blend of the DNL, and then there's one that's actually a resigment mixture. So clinically, is
there much difference? It's really hard to prove that, but there are options available. If a patient
doesn't tolerate one, et cetera, respond to one version, then there are options to try another.
There's also a formulation of dexamphetamine that has lysine attached to it. And I have seen this as
a question before on board exam prep. So it's worth noting the rationale behind this is that the
conversion to dexamphetamine is slowed down because the lysine must be removed. So theoretically,
this may reduce the potential for ***** because of a delaying effect. However, there's little data
to show that there's an increased risk of *****, but that is the rationale why this product is on
the market. And lastly, just as an interesting fact, methamphetamine became approved or was approved
for ADHD back in 1943. It is still available in generic form as a prescription drug for this
condition. However, it's rarely used. So our second type of stimulant is, of course,
methylphenidate. Again, the mechanism of action is inhibition of the neurotransmitters, therefore
causing increased amount of both dopamine and norepi in the synapse. It's considered a non
-selective reuptake inhibitor because it blocks reuptake of more than one neurotransmitter. I have
included trade names on here, as I have elsewhere in the slide. I don't expect you to memorize that.
This is just to help you with familiarity because some of these names, generic names, can get a
little complex. As with the amphetamine family, multiple formulations of methylphenidate are
available, including a D -isomer, which is also the active form. The following two slides, just to
reiterate what we've already talked about, and so I won't go back into this in more detail. It's
just a different way of looking at what we talked about previously. Excuse me, this slide, you'll
know there are norepi transporters, the NET, this slide, dopamine. Just to reiterate the fact that
ultimately these transporters are not that selective between the two. And with the stimulant family,
again, we believe that it's the increased availability of both dopamine and norepi in these patients
which help them. so overall initiation titration and monitoring of of all the stimulants drug
therapy should be chosen obviously on an individualized basis and when you consider things like
dosing timing adverse effects which formulation is best tolerable cost you know all that has to be
considered there are several monitoring parameters that need to be established or conducted at
baseline and throughout therapy. This slide includes general recommendations for both titration and
monitoring. There is some variability in these recommendations amongst groups. I have tried to
follow what the American Academy of Pediatrics recommends. A key takeaway point is that it's
necessary to monitor these patients and have close follow-up, especially after a patient is, after,
excuse me, a medication is initiated. The stimulant medications can be titrated fairly quickly if
it's tolerated because typically you see a response or not fairly soon. It is recommended that you
have a face-to-face follow-up for these patients because they tend to be young, and you definitely
want to catch if they're having any adverse effect. Adverse effects with the stimulant family are
typically dose -related, which makes sense when we look at the pharmacology. Dosing stimulants early
in the day using immediate release product formulations can be helpful because, as you would expect,
these medications are associated with insomnia with delayed release formulations and so if if you
get to if you have a choice between immediate delayed you know think about impact on sleep you know
the immediate products acting products don't last as long so they're less likely to impact sleep the
delayed release products last longer and so depending on what time of the day their dose they could
impact sleep growth suppression has been associated specifically with methylphenidate but we still
monitor growth in patients who are on amphetamines the growth suppression is minimal for most
children children will lose may lose some weight and it may have some impact on height is typically
not a huge impact studies indicate that in the first year of methylphenidate use most patients will
lose an average of about three kilos the weight loss will taper over time and again most of the
impact isn't in the first year but we do want to keep a close eye on that it's important for you to
note that the the impact on weight is due to reduced food intake and the patients just aren't as
hungry as before they were on the medication so it's not due to an alteration in metabolism it's due
to reduced food intake again and this is helpful to know because you can work with the patient and
the caregivers to ensure that when these patients do eat, we actually want them to eat something
that's high calorie, a high calorie meal or high calorie stack so we can maintain their growth.
Lastly, we do have headaches and abdominal pain. Sometimes there's adverse effects. We see that with
this patient population. Those both tend to subside over time. So the next set of adverse effects
includes our cardiovascular effects. It's not surprising because we're impacting repinephrine that
we can see slight increases in heart rate and slight increases in blood pressure. And some patients
were talking about one to two beats per minute for heart rate and one to four millimeters of mercury
for systolic and diastolic for blood pressure. Some patients may have more pronounced effects than
that, 5 to 15%. So it's not a majority, but it is while we monitor this heart rate and blood
pressure in all patients at baseline and throughout therapy. So additional baseline screening
recommendations should also include a family history of cardiovascular disease, including the ones
I've listed on the slide. I won't read all of them. And the patients themselves, if they have a
known history of any type of structural cardiac disease, then stimulants should be avoided. It's not
recommended that all patients get a baseline EKG, all patients put on stimulants, that is. However,
if a patient themselves has a risk factor, it is recommended that those patients do get a baseline
EKG. But again, it's not recommended that all patients on stimulant therapy get an ECOG. I've
included this slide for completeness sake, and I won't delve into the details, but this is a fairly
recent study, a review rather, looking at stimulants and the correlation between medications and
cardiovascular events. And I included this again just as an FYI. It included about 19 different
studies. And overall, basically, it shows what the current literature supports. And that is that it
does not appear to be overt cardiovascular risk when we look at the well-screened patient population
and cardiovascular impact. So finishing up with our stimulant class, one of the things we need to
include here that ticks are potential adverse effects with stimulants. A tick is a brief,
repetitive, recurrent motor contraction, and it can be precipitated by a stimulant. However, if a
patient has responded well to their stimulant and the tick is not interfering with their educational
or day-to-day activities, it is acceptable to leave them on the medication. But if the reverse is
true, if the tick is bothersome to their education and day-to-day life, then it may be best to take
them off of stimulant therapy and try one of the non-stimulants. Priapism, which is a prolonged
******** for more than four hours, has been associated with stimulant use, primarily
methylphenidate. And so it's not very common, but it is included in one of the potential adverse
effects to be aware of. so it's a fair question do stimulants help improve scholastic performance
because that is one of our goals in many of our patients data currently indicates that performance
improves in elementary students reading and math scores compared to non-treated patients however
scores still lie behind non -ADHD peers but for the individual patient they there is some benefit.
There are standard scales used at baseline at diagnosis to evaluate future therapy. You may be
familiar with the Connor scale. The scales help us with some consistency in assessment from when the
patient is diagnosed and then treated and helped us to objectively determine medications help
patients. So I wanted to be aware there is an objective, a parameter to use when we're looking at
the benefit or lack thereof in these patients. so what do we do if a patient doesn't respond to
their initial stimulant medication well you can increase the dose which is pretty straightforward i
do want to say be wary of really high off-label doses of stimulants because there are that is
sometimes an approach keep in mind as we said that adverse effects are dose related and so
increasing the dose beyond what is published in the recommendations is just can be risky. There also
may be some rational reasons why patients don't respond to certain medications, you know, such as
pharmacogenetic, excuse me, pharmacokinetic differences within that individual patient. They may
have a pharmacogenetic profile where they don't metabolize the medications as well. They may have a
difference in their um their transporters for these neurotransmitters so um there can be some some
real variability which is why there's a bit of a trial and error in some patients to find find the
best therapy currently we do not do pharmacogenetic testing in all patients because it's not a high
yield thing and then um a last point on this when when someone tells you the medication didn't work
It's real important you get a specific history because it could be that it worked initially and then
we're off throughout the day. You know, maybe they need a long acting product. And so you need to be
specific when someone says or find out specifics, because it may be a little more complicated than
whether it's just didn't work at all. So to finish our statement discussion, there is a warning
regarding *****, misuse and addiction. I pulled the specific warning from Adderall, and there's a
warning because there may be an increased risk for ***** of potential with these medications.
However, data currently do not indicate that a patient is at increased risk for abusing drugs.
Because of their pharmacology, this black box warning has been added. So it's definitely something
to be aware of. But right now we don't have evidence that patients who are placed on stimulants for
this condition have an increased risk of abusing medications. Now, if you have a patient who has not
started stimulant therapy yet and they already have a history of substance *****, then you may want
to consider a different option in that patient population. So we will move on to the non-stimulant
medications. Just as a recap, we just talked about the stimulants, which include amphetamines and
methylphenidate. And now we're moving on to the handful of classes that include the non-stimulant
medication. These are alternatives to the stimulants if comorbidities are present, which preclude
the use of stimulants. These do not, they're not as effective as the stimulants. That doesn't mean
they don't work at all. It's just that they don't tend to be as effective. uh it's also worth noting
that they they have a slower onset of benefit it may take two to four weeks um versus you know a
couple days um with stimulants there are some shared concerns when we look at um adverse effects to
watch out for and that goes back to the pharmacology um patients with cardiovascular risk factors um
at baseline need to be further evaluated with non-stimulants just as they were as we said with
stimulants and it's very similar in EKG consult with the consult the cardiologist but again that's
just patients with risk factors that's not all patients the first non-stimulant we'll talk about is
atamoxetine which is also known as dratera it is a selective reutake inhibitor of norepi so it does
not have an appreciable effect on dopamine again it has a slower therapeutic benefit or onset of
onset of benefit i have on here that because of that you may need to overlap a stimulant with a non-
stimulant for transitioning someone however you would want to be very cautious about that and you
would probably want to seek consultation of someone that has done that on a routine basis because
these drugs all impact NREPI, if you have a patient taking two at one time, even if you reduce the
dose of one, they could really be predisposed to adverse effects. So even though that is a
recommendation, it's something to consider seriously. Adverse effects with atomoxetine, there are
some shared similarities with stimulants, and then there's some things that are different. The
abdominal pain is a shared adverse effect, but if you'll see somnolence is unique. The stimulants
are associated with insomnia. Atamoxetine is associated with making people sleepy. You also see
decreased appetite with atamoxetine as you do with stimulants, and we've already mentioned you can
also see some increase in heart rate and blood pressure, again, because it causes norepi to be
increased. It is metabolized by one of our P450 systems, and so there are individuals who are
genetically predisposed to being slow metabolizers. We don't screen for that, but it is something to
be aware of. There are rare cases, case reports of liver injury in the literature. Because it's
rare, we don't routinely screen these patients for liver based on liver disease or throughout their
drug therapy. These are typically younger patients that tend to have healthy livers to begin with.
However, if the patient starts to manifest signs of liver dysfunction, such as paritis, dark urine,
et cetera, then you would stop the medication and then evaluate them. And then lastly, we see that
this medication has a warning about increased risk for suicidal ideation, which seems a bit random.
And this is because the mechanism, the reuptake, blockade and reuptake of norepi is, we have some
antidepressants that have that similar pharmacology. And currently, all the antidepressants we have
in the U.S. on the market carry a warning about the potential for increased suicidal ideation. And
because the pharmacology is so similar with atomoxetine, it basically is required to have the same
warning. Our next non -stimulant is the newest one that was around or approved, excuse me, in 2021.
One, it's very similar to atomoxetine, even the generic name looks similar. Another selective
inhibitor of norepia reuptake. Very parallel side effects, somnolence, headache, appetites reduced,
cardiovascular effects can be there, and then it's required to have the same warning because, again,
its pharmacology is similar to antidepressants. So still fairly new, so we don't know if there's a
lot to distinguish it yet from atomoxetine. So the next class of non-stimulants are the alpha-2
adrenergic agonists. When we look at their mechanism, traditionally, when you talk about this class,
and you will discuss them more when you learn about hypertension, we attribute their benefit to
their presynaptic pharmacology. They are alpha-2 agonists. And so one of the things they do is that
they agonize the autoreceptor. And I'm going to jump ahead here. you have these autoreceptors where
when there's enough norepi in the synapse, it sort of feeds back to this autoreceptor and tells the
presynaptor neuron, no more norepi. And so that helps with hypertension because you have less
neurotransmitter. However, that doesn't fit with what we talked about up to this point, because all
the other agents we've talked about have increased norepi. So while it didn't make sense that a drug
that reduces norepi helps ADHD? Well, it doesn't. So it's thought that the benefit in ADHD is not
related to the presynaptic autoreceptor. It's thought that the postsynaptic alpha-2 receptors are
where the benefit is generated. So the postsynaptic effect has been associated with increased blood
flow and prefrontal cortexes. And it's thought that it's that mechanism that actually helps with
memory and executive functioning. So at least that's our current understanding. The alpha-2 agonists
can be used either by themselves or in combination with other ADHD medications. And like atomoxetine
and filoxazine, they can be used as options in patients in whom stimulants should be avoided for a
certain concern or comorbidity. So, the alpha-2 agonists, their family of adverse effects, they
cause sedation, which could be a benefit. They actually cause the opposite effects of the other
drugs when we look at cardiovascular effects. They cause reduced heart rate, potentially, and
potentially low blood pressure. Because of their mechanism at the presynaptic alpha -2 receptor,
there's a potential for rebound hypertension if they're abruptly stopped. So patients need to be
real consistent about taking them. And then lastly, constipation can be an adverse effect. So now
we're going to talk about a concern potentially with all the agents we've talked about up to this
point. All the stimulants, the amphetamines and methylphenidate, atamoxetine, and alpha-2. I did not
include viloxazine because it's still new and we don't know if this applies yet. So I did exclude
that one. All of these other agents currently have a warning about the potential for certain
psychiatric adverse effects. They've mostly been reported with stimulants, but these other agents
have had a few cases as well. And this falls under three specific categories, psychosis, mood
disturbances, and then severe anxiety attacks. And so this is good to keep in mind. It's not
something we see in the majority of patients, but it's helpful to know, for instance, if you have a
patient that have any of these at baseline, you need to at least be aware that any of these
therapies may exacerbate the underlying condition. So I did want to include a little bit about a
drug holiday period. There's not universal agreement on this. A holiday is a break from drug
therapy. It's mostly been recommended when it is recommended, which isn't by everybody, for
stimulants. It could be over a weekend. It could be for a longer period of time, such as in the
summer. And not everybody is of the opinion these patients should have a holiday. And so it's not
universally agreed upon, but I want you to be aware of it. So the potential benefit is that for
patients who have had an impact on their growth, this may allow them to catch up. But it's also a
time when you could re-evaluate the need for the patient to stay on therapy. But regardless, the
benefit of stopping versus continuing the medication should be evaluated. So I mentioned this is
primarily something that might be considered with stimulant therapy. Remember, the non -stimulants
take a while to work, that delayed effect to benefit. So it doesn't really make sense that we would
have a holiday with the non-stimulants because it just means you'd have to restart, reinitiate a
drug titation process. So last medication I will include, and I'll put it at the very end because
it's used in primarily the adult population, and you'll see it in the literature. So I wanted you to
be aware of that. This is bupropion. It is a weak norepi and dopamine reuptake inhibitor approved
officially for depression and smoking cessation, but it is used off -label for ADHD. So you may use
it in patients or see it used in patients. Not surprisingly, it's adverse effects along with what
we've seen with the other medications that impact norepine dopamine, appetite suppression, insomnia,
tachycardia. It does have the unique concern of potentially lower seizure threshold. And because it
is an antidepressant, it also carries that suicidal ideation warning. A practice point I wanted to
include, I know you haven't learned a lot yet about the Drug Enforcement Agency's drug schedules.
The stimulants are all Schedule II drugs, and that impacts practice because it impacts
prescriptions. Specifically, Schedule II's cannot be automatically refilled. Wherever you practice,
you know, make sure you know what the the laws are there are federal laws that that oversee this but
there could be additional criteria to consider at the state level and then lastly I'll add it in
here which doesn't really tie to the DEA thing but it's something to consider it is a valuable
consideration in these patients you know when to stop therapy altogether you know do they need
lifelong therapy do they only need it during certain certain phase of their life you know But that's
an individualized discussion to have with patients and their caregivers and something to consider.
So in summary, pharmacotherapy is only one modality. Therapeutic goals should be identified at the
outset. Stimulants are first line, but we do a non-stimulant options for patients and home
stimulants are not the best choice. and in these are patients you definitely have to follow you
can't just start a medication and see them a year later so periodically assess them both for benefit
of treatment and for any adverse effects that the patient may be experiencing these are my core
references so I'll end where we started what is a stimulant in the management of ADHD a stimulant
refers to an amphetamine type medication or methamphetamine, I'm sorry, excuse me, amphetamine or
methylphenidate. And then here is the lecture feedback form. I will add that I have my version of a
transcript for this video recording uploaded onto Canvas. And so you can download that and you've
got a cleaned up version, if you will, of the transcript that I've edited. And so that is available
to you. So with that, good luck. And please reach out if you have any questions. Thank you.