Hello everyone, this is Isaac Kertzer of the Department of Biomedical Science, Old Westbury Campus. And this is the second of two lectures on the internal anatomy of the brainstem. Here we're going to be covering the major tracks that course through the brainstem, along with the cranial nerve nuclei that are situated within the brainstem. There are three session objectives for this lecture. First, we need to understand the general route of some of these long tracts, where they begin and where they end and what they pass on through. Second, we need to identify from external landmarks and a horizontal section the placement of the tracts mentioned above, what they look like from both vantages. Third, you need to identify the position of the cranial nerve nuclei with respect to their general functions we'll be considering six major tracts coursing through the brainstem the cortical spinal tract will be originating in the cerebral cortex and traveling down to the spinal cord the dorsal column medial lumniscus and spinal thalamic tract will be originating in the periphery of the body and traveling to the cerebral cortex to relay sensory information. Then we have the cerebellar penuncles, three of them, inferior, middle, and superior. These are going to be relaying information to and from the cerebellum. As you surely know, the right cerebral cortex is going to be controlling the left side of the body, and the left cerebral cortex will be controlling the right side of the body. And so there needs to be a decussation of those fibers at some point, and that occurs for the most part at the bottom of the medulla. The caudal medulla, 80% or more of the fibers will decussate, and that is called the pyramidal decussation. 10 to 20% of the fibers stay on the same side we're going to be focusing on the 80 to 90 percent and these two slides or these two images provide some information about that on the right is the simplest cartoon image of fiber tracks passing on down from midbrain through ponds through medulla then finally decussating at the bottom of medulla on the left we have some similar information but in addition we see at the midbrain that the corticospinal tract occupies the middle one-third of the cruceribri and that's traveling as one parallel highway of information but when it reaches the ponds the highway breaks on up as each fiber needs to find its own way through the traffic jam of information that is moving left to right and right to left from those pontine nuclei so those pontine nuclei will be sending axons to the contralateral side and forming the middle cerebellar peduncle and there's just no simple way to go through that you have to split up and then recoalesce and that recoalescing is at the end of the pond so at the top of the medulla and so we can see that those fibers now recoalesce at the top of the medulla and then travel down together as the pyramids finally decussating at the bottom. Now let us look at some actual sections of the brainstem and see where the corticospiral tract would route its fibers through it. We will start at the highest level of the brainstem the midbrain we can tell this is the midbrain because of those large stalks that we see on the anterior side we also have on the dorsal side these swellings which are clearly the colliculi and we have anterior to the colliculi this small pore which is the cerebral aqueduct. So these are all features that are characteristic of the midbrain. It should be noted that the image on the right is more rostral than the image on the left because we have the presence of the substantia *****. If we moved up even further we would see the red nuclei. So we are more caudal than the red nuclei, but we are still above the section that's on the left where we see this clear decussation of the superior peduncles. Now let's talk about the corticospinal tract. This red dot, which is in the middle one-third of the cruse cerebri, that will be originating from fibers on the ipsilateral cerebral cortex and it maintains this position in the middle third of the cruceribri throughout its coursing of midbrain. Now we're within the pons. You can tell we're within pons because of that bulbous interior surface. We can also see the fourth ventricle behind the brainstem and behind that would be the cerebellum. So these are undoubtedly slices through the pons. The most rostral section is on the right the most caudal on the left and you can see these various bundles of dark material reflecting the axons the stained axons and within that this is most certainly the corticospiral tract is a corticospiral tract coursing on through again on the same side again on the anterior side. There has not yet been a decussation, but there are many of these different bundles because those fibers by necessity have split up to dive between the fibers that are going from right-left and left -right from the pontine nuclei ultimately through coalescing to be the middle cerebellar peduncle here there are three transverse sections through the medulla the most rostral section is on the right the most caudal is on the left we can see the familiar tube-like structure we have other familiar nuclei in front of us including the inferior olivary nuclei and the dorsal column nuclei. Now where is the corticospinal tract? Again on the very same side that we saw for the pons and the midbrain. It is in the basilar region and on the same side. Those fibers have not yet decussated at the rostral medulla nor the middle medulla, we'll say, but only at the most caudal portion of the medulla is there a decussation. Do you see how the fibers, I drew this dot on the right and now it's on the left do you see these fibers crossing right here that is the decussation that is the decussation from right to left and we also have from left to right if we look at the very bottom of this image we can see from the external view the obscuring of these columns because these columns vanish the columns reflect fibers moving in parallel and then when they all move from left and right you no longer have a column that is obliterated you still have fibers but they are no longer within a column that's why the smeared out region clearly signifies the pyramidal decussation onto the dorsal column medial linuscus as you can see from the naming of this pathway there are two portions the dorsal columns which are found within the spinal cord and are going to be relaying information from the periphery on on up to the caudal medulla from the caudal medulla from the dorsal column nuclei those efferents those axons from the dorsal column nuclei are called the medial limniscus. They'll be called the medial limniscus as they travel throughout the brainstem until they eventually terminate in the thalamus. The decussation for this pathway is at the very beginning of the axons emanating from the dorsal column nuclei. And so we can see a cartoon of that on the left pointing out dorsal column nuclei and then this crossing on over and then very sharp bend extremely sharp bend and then traveling on up that extremely sharp bend which moves the information over from left to right or right to left and also forward meaning from the most dorsal portion to a more interior position that curve in the road is called the internal arcuate. It is the very same axons as the medial lemniscus. It's just a different name for this very distinct curve in the path that these axons must take. The last point I should mention is that The medial linuscus is always going to be medial to the spinal thalamic. Those are the fibers that will be conveying pain and temperature, and their decussation already occurred at the spinal level. The dorsal columns of the dorsal column medial linuscus is found in the spinal cord. They're also called the posterior columns. They're also called the cuneate and gracile fasciculi. They will be terminating at the caudal medulla. The blue dot that we have, the most caudal portion of the medulla on the left, is the gracile fasciculus. We can see that it is the more medial of the two so this is going to be reflecting the dorsal column medial to that we see this white territory which is a nucleus that is going to be the gracile nucleus these fibers will project i.e. synapse onto this nucleus and this dorsal column nucleus its axons are going to decussate and ascend as the medial lemniscus at the early stage of this medial lemniscus we have a right angle of fiber crossings that's called the internal arcuate you can really see that sense of motion that I'm drawing on here going from right to left trust me it's going from left to right as well and we have a rearrangement of the fibers in space they don't merely just flip on over as as they decussate they move on forward and have this more um sagittal orientation okay and you could look at this mustache of a fella that was famous in his day charlie chaplin now you could think well that mustache that he has kind of looks like these uh orientation of these fibers for the medial lemniscus. And when you're moving throughout the medulla, it will look like Charlie Chaplin's mustache from the mid-medulla and onward. It's situated right behind the corticospinal tract. So at this point, the medial lemniscus is going to be representing contralateral information because it originated from the opposite side. And the pyramidal tract will also be relaying contralateral information insofar as it has not decasated to affect the contralateral side of the body. Now we're within the pons, tracking the placement of the medial linuscus throughout its course going from caudal to rostral ponds you can see that is within the tegmentum of the ponds it's not within basilar ponds which is interior to it here it's interior it's a tegmentum tegmentum and it remains on this same side throughout its course. It's already decasated. It will not switch over again. It will ultimately be destined to the thalamus on the same side and from the thalamus to the cerebral cortex on the same side. Now what do these fibers look like? We can see that there's no longer that sagittal orientation there's more of a frontal orientation of the fibers and you could say it's a little bit like this fella's mustache who was famous in his day Clark Gable so you have a more Clark Gable like mustache at the palms now in position of the medial lemniscus in the midbrain the fibers have become oriented in a pattern that is angular and outwards so it is within the tegmentum it's not basilar midbrain is dorsal to that this is all going to be tegmentum up to you get to the tectum or the superior colliculi so it's in the tegmentum immediately adjacent to the basilar portion of the midbrain at this lower level. And we see that the fibers are oriented this way, this way. And you could say, what about this fella? He's got a mustache too. It's kind of wild and goes backwards. That's another way of kind of remembering what the fibers look like on the right we're at a higher level of the midbrain again the fibers are at that orientation um uh pointing out uh backwards okay is not this it is not this curling back is not this this curling back we'll be getting to that soon enough Now we turn to the spinal thalamic tract, which is an ascending afferent system that will be relaying pain and temperature information from the body's periphery to the contralateral cerebral cortex. Unlike the medial lemniscus, it will have made its decussation within the spinal cord. So the dorsal root ganglion that has an axon innervating some tissue, let's just say a pain receptor in the big toe, it will be synapsing. onto a nucleus within the spinal cord, the nucleus proprius, and then from there that nucleus proprius will be decussating across the spinal cord and its axons are the spionthalamic tract, sometimes called the interolateral tract within the spinal cord, but there's other ascending tracks within that that terminate within particular formation and whatnot but for our purposes we're really focused on the spinothalamic track and it will be one that will continue all the way up to the thalamus and so I want to mention this right here it's a good time when you see things like spinothalamic that means from and to it comes up again again we saw it with corticospinal okay so uh when you see this uh conjoined um or compound word that has two different structures that you're aware of i don't know let's just say rubrospinal that will come up at some point that's from the red nucleus to the spinal cord so spinothalamic from the spine to the thalamus and this track is much more simple than all the other ones we we covered as far as the brainstem is conserved concerned it will just be maintaining a lateral position along the length of the brainstem. We're back to sections through the brainstem, back to the medulla. We're interested in how the spinal thalamic tract is positioned throughout the medulla. We can see it is on the same side throughout the medulla. It will be on the same side throughout the pons and throughout the midbrain, and it will ultimately terminate on the thalamus. The decussation has already happened for this fiber tract at the level of the spinal cord. The cell bodies for this tract are at the spinal cord. Now, this makes it a much simpler system to understand by being on the same side. and it's simpler to understand because it retains its position laterally throughout. So right here we're effectively analogous to the enteral lateral tract of the spinal cord even though we are in the medulla. At a more rostral level of the medulla we can see that the spinal thalamic tract is lateral and also positioned behind the inferior olive so it's within the tegmentum of the medulla. I think of this position cheekily to myself but I relay the joke that it's sensitive to pain and temperature so it's easily scared and is hiding behind the olive. It's a little bit hard to find where this tract is just generally. Medial lemniscus is very clear, corticospinal tract is very clear, but the level of the medulla it is a bit hard to find. So I think of it as hiding behind the medulla. It senses pain, so it's going to be easy to hide. That's how I do it. You do it. You do you. Looking at the medial lemniscus and spout thalamic tract positions throughout the pons, we can see that the medial lemniscus continues to be medial to the spout thalamic. that was the case within the medulla but here they're effectively adjacent to each other at the caudal medulla they're quite separated in their interior postural position in the rostral medulla when you have the inferior olive now that that's gone they become neighbors and they'll continue to be neighbors as they move through the midbrain traveling side by side now at the level of the midbrain we can see the fibers of the medial lemniscus at this angler position that i likened to the mustache of um salvador um dolly that uh that artist from way back well at the as it makes this turn inwards that will be the um spinal calamity so we can see little nub of that um off over here on the left oh i don't think that you're seeing what i'm circling off over here on the left we can see that this is the spinal thalamic whereas this would be the medial lemniscus and it will continue to have that position as you're moving on from the caudal midbrain to rostral midbrain. This is the medial luniscus and this is the spinal thalamic tract. These cartoons bring out a fact that may have gotten missed in the sections that we are going through and that is the decussation for the cortical spinal tract is more caudal than the decussation for the medial linuscus that is the pyramidal decussation which is seen on the ventral caudal medulla which is um at the very end of the medulla no more medulla past that that is where you have the dramatic crossing of left right right to left for the corticospial tract and then the dorsal column nuclei which are receiving the afferent fibers of the dorsal column which have their cell body in the dorsal root ganglion these nuclei will decussate for the internal arcuate and then medial lemniscus actually a different name for the same road that will be at a higher level than the paranormal decussation so you could have a section that would affect one selectively and not the other in terms of the crossing over of information if be very careful about that in our description and these cartoons help bring out the relative position of the ascending tracks in terms of the position medial laterally and anterior posteriorly On the left, we can see the cartoon again of the medial, the meniscus is always medial to the spinothalamic. The thickness of the lines indicates its closeness to us in space. So when it's thin, that means that we would be seeing those fibers far away because they are on the dorsal side, and they become thick after they've done the decussation because they've moved towards us moved more ventrally while the spinothalamic tract is pretty much in the same position throughout its course on the right we have the very same information but now reversed we're looking at it a cartoon of the brainstem from the dorsal side so that vertical oval would be the floor of the fourth ventricle so we can see the fibers of the medial linuscus being nearby us dorsal right and then they become thin after the decussation because they're moving away from us moving ventrally on to the cerebellar peduncles remember that we have three of them superior middle and inferior and I will do a little drawing of each so here would be the superior here we have the inferior and pretty much all of this is going to be the middle so that middle is enormous and you could call it the lateral because it's the most lateral in extent now we're going to be looking at transverse sections again and trying to understand where these tracks are within that sections and it's it's it's a bit tough but you can have some intuition that the inferior will be most inferior and then as we move through this region right here associated with the ponds we're really going to have these massive middle cerebellar peduncles so the inferior cerebellar peduncles going to be collecting fibers from many different sources but one of them you've encountered during the spinal cord lecture is the dorsal cerebellar tract which I put with a white circle here and this is its positioning you might remember and as the other fibers coalesce with the dorsal cerebellar spinal tract it will become the inferior peduncle so it's just as if like this would be one road and then here this is a larger highway that this road fed in to at this point we're pretty much at the very same position within the neural axis that is very laterally it has moved from a dorsal position it has moved more dorsally than before you know they call there is a ventral spinal cellar tract which is more ventral than this that's why it's called dorsal and ventral all of that would be within the lateral phenunculus but this is the more dorsal of the two though it's not on the dorsal side now is on the dorsal side when we're in the upper medulla it will be present within the caudal pons just below the this large nucleus here which you might think is the inferior olive but you know better don't you that's the dentate nucleus it just looks like the inferior olive so I'm drawing the right now moving the highlighter over the inferior cerebellar peduncle we do not see it at the more rostral levels because it has entered into the cerebellum. It is still is no longer the cerebellar peduncle because it was traveling to the cerebellum and above this level it's within the cerebellum. It's making its projections at that point and so that's why you no longer see it. you may remember that the middle cerebellar peduncle are the efferents of the pontine nuclei so the pontine nuclei are found within the pons um within the tegmentum of the pons they will be uh sending their axons um from right to left and from left to right and when they re-coalesce traveling to the cerebellum that is the metal cerebellar peduncle the middle cerebellar peduncle over here that we're not showing because the image was cut off but trust me it's really quite large and that would be found at the caudal portion of the ponds middle and rostral portion of the ponds you do not find it below you do not find it above because it is traveling to the cerebellum and it is already entered at that point and the origin is within the pons that's why you don't find it within the medulla. The last of the cerebellar peduncles to discuss is the superior the one that's going to be found at the highest level and And we have a bit of the snapshot of the superior peduncle when you are within caudal ponds, but not when you're in the medulla at all. okay so there is no yellow dot seen for one two three but when you get to four we see a yellow dot and it is awfully close to the dent to that inferior peduncle at this point so but it would be medial to the dentate nucleus while the inferior peduncle would be ventral to it immediately ventral to it now moving more rostrally this large stalk like tracks this is superior peduncle it's very distinct at this point it's it's one of the most distinct points that you could have it in any of the sections It pretty much has the same positioning when you're even higher within the ponds, okay? But at the midbrain, it's very different. We can see the centermost region is superior peduncle because this is its decussation. as the fibers below cross left right and right left so it's a it's it's it's a output output fibers from the cerebellum and cerebellum is responsible for coordination on the ipsilateral side so as these fibers are going to communicate to the cerebral cortex there has to be a crossing over of information it's a lot of complexity and we're not holding you to that right really with this lecture note to say that this smudged out region those are the same axons as we see below it's them ascending and then decussating and then they will ultimately be targeting structures that are going to be um um more rostral like the red nucleus like the thalamus and so on cranial nerves was a topic that was covered in your foundation of medicine lectures and you learned the name of the cranial nerves that are linked to the brainstem nerves 3 through 12 and you learned that some are sensory and some are motor and some are both and here is a reminder rhyme for that what you did not cover were the nuclei that are associated with these nerves those were cranial nerve lectures and we're going to be now trying to relate those nerves to the nuclei they're not free -floating axons the axons either terminate on a nucleus or they arise from a nucleus in the brainstem and this is the point we're going to be making that transition but before that I I want you to re -familiarize yourself with the names of the various nerves and whether they are sensory, motor, or both. Cranial nerve nuclei have a consistent rostrocaudal position according to their associated nerve and a consistent medial lateral position within the brainstem according to their function so we can see the numbering is for the insertion of the nerves and then there is going to be ovals of various length that will be indicating the nucleus placement and a cartoon of its extent and you can I'm trying to convey here is that the nucleus for cranial nerve 3 is within the midbrain so the cranial nerve 3 pen rate exits at the midbrain as nucleus is found within the midbrain same with the nucleus for cranial nerve 4 so that's the trochleus nucleus that will be linked to the trochlear nerve the nerve of exits from the midbrain the nucleus is found within the midbrain and that's generally the case so the nerve nuclei have a consistent rostrocaudal position according to nerve oh let me give you another example 12 which is the hypoglossal nerve it has a nucleus called hypoglossal nucleus and it also will be at the medulla so that is um quite helpful another thing that's helpful to know is that the nuclei for which is a long list about 20 that will be on the next slides those can be broken down to several different unique general functions. We can say that they're motor and we can say that they're sensory. None of these nuclei are sensory and motor. That doesn't exist. They are motor or they are sensory that's unlike nerves which can be mixed now if their motor we can break down their function into somatic motor brachial motor or visceral motor and that would be according to the type of tissue that they innervate are they innervating muscles are they going to be ultimately driving glands through activating a ganglia of the peripheral nervous system excuse me then there is the sensory functions for which we have visceral somatic and special sensory and all of the these are grouped together and said these will be lateral the sensory the nuclei having these general sensory functions while motor are medial and you can see this in the cartoon image that I have here the positioning of the cranial nuclei is at this cartoon form for this lecture I'm not going to be testing on particular nuclei here that's covered in lab four which is likely to be several weeks away okay so this is not to overwhelm you but to try to provide a foundation for you to understand the positioning of these nuclei and it's not just *****-nilly so why do the cranial nerve nuclei have this medial lateral relation where motor's medial sensory is lateral and the the answer is because it developed that way so it seems complex now but it wasn't always that case and then as it developed it went from being something that is simple to something that is much less intuitive so let's go back to that neuroembryology lecture that you had and you have the neural tube which is kind of like the spinal cord where the there is a basal and a LR plate and the basal portion is where you would be having the motor neurons and the LR dorsal portion is where you have the sensory neurons and it continues to have this arrangement when we have a fully developed spinal cord we have the the dorsal horn and the ventral horn of the spinal cord but we're talking about the brainstem and the brainstem is going to be controlling the um the structures of the head and the head is um we have the brain uh the developing brain within the cranium and it's very space limited and you are growing those neurons at an extremely high rate. You're developing a large brain. And so in order to accommodate all the neural tissue within this limited space, you have folds. And so here you have the pontine flexor, which is a major folding of the neural material, which is going to create the fourth ventricle on the dorsal side. Now what does that have to do with the medial lateral arrangements of these nuclei? Let me tell you. Imagine a hinge for two doors that are going to run to the back. At the beginning those two doors are touching each other. But with development and this pontine flexure, those doors move away from each other. Remember there's a hinge at the front and the doors are going to be swinging open this way. And that is what we have going on here there's been the swinging open of those doors being that the tissue has rotated from the dorsal position to the lateral position such that now the sensory neurons are lateral and the motor neurons are medial and because you had the viscalsensory and visceromotor adjacent to each other in this positioning or at stage of development they become mirroring to each other at this other stage so that the visceral sensory are nearby the visceral motor whereas the somatic sensory and the somatic motor are more separate from each other this chart includes all the cranial nerve nuclei as well as all the cranial nerves they're associated with the brainstem okay so the nerves 3 through 12 form the rows going from top to bottom and then we have the nuclei that are found within a particular cell that will be associated with a nerve and a function So we have the six general functions for those cranial nerve nuclei. Remember, they're going to be sensory or motor, not both. So we have ocular motor nucleus, trochlear, abducens, and hypoglossal, all being somatic motor, and that's quite different than, I don't know, let's just say vestibular and cochlear which is special sensory on the far right and so your job is to understand what are the general functions for all of the nuclei that are listed okay you do not need to know the relationship with me you eventually will. But for this lecture, we are not holding you to understanding what's the relationship between the nerves and the nuclei, because that gets quite complex. So we say cranial nerve nine is associated with a whole pile of nuclei, and a given nuclei might be associated with several cranial nerves. Working through all of that, we do not have enough time for. Okay, we're building on up. In building on up, what your job is here to understand there are 20 cranial nerve nuclei to consider. And there's going to be, each one will be characterized as having a particular function, be it somatomotor, brochiomotor, visceromotor, and so on and so that's what you're going to have to draw out and try to understand what their general general layout is because the specific layout will be presented in lab four which is about the internal anatomy of the brain stem for cranial nerve nuclei and other structures And that is tough, right? That is very tough to say, oh, that little bump right there or that little cluster, that's this nucleus. This is more general, but it is a fair amount of material to process. So that's where we've broken it up. here is a another slide presenting similar information that we had for the chart but not in a chart form it's going to be laying out the information in terms of the placement of these nuclei within the different rostral caudal positions of the brainstem be it in the midbrain pons and medulla we're not going to be really testing that right now but something to help you build up that understanding you have a pretty good intuition for some of these because we have an ocular motor nucleus which goes with the ocular motor nerve and that we already talked about that the nerve the nucleus is going to be pretty much at the same level as the nerve so you will be able to piece some of this information together and then i have some qualifiers to the side that say well there's a little bit of complexity there's always there's there's this complexity and then there's further complexity and i'm going to kind of push that further complexity to the side and only bring it up as needed and that is ambiguous as a brachial component and a visceral efferent component which you will learn is for inhibiting the heart rate and so we'll kind of make a special note about that now also in some textbooks spinal accessory is classifies as brachial sometimes it's somatic motor and that's because it has certain complexities which we're not going to really deal with anymore suffice to say I felt it was best to put within the brachial column. That's all the material that we have for this lecture. Let's summarize. The major descending and ascending tracts have distinct trajectories throughout the brainstem. The corticospinal tract is always the most ventral. It decussates in the lower medulla. The DCML decussates in the upper medulla and changes position through the brainstem but is always more medial than the spinothalamic tract the spinothalamic tract decussates in the spinal cord is always lateral to the DCML the three cerebellar peduncles are present at different levels of the brainstem inferior for medulla and lower pons middle for pons superior for upper pons and lower midbrain the cranial nerve nuclei have a rostral caudal placement roughly aligned with cranial nerves and that there is a rational arrangement of the cranial nerve nuclei where there are three motor columns that are medial and three sensory columns that are lateral. I hope that material was presented clearly enough. Feedback is welcome.