Hello and welcome to the Microbiology Lecture, Bacteria 1 and 2, Structure and Physiology. This lecture is divided into two, but it's really one subject because it covers almost two hours. We've chosen to put it as two individual lectures. It basically sets up a lot of basic microbiology that people would have in the undergraduate. road. These are the session objectives, the one highlighted in the one, two, and three right here. Those are going to be covered in the first lecture and four to eight are covered in the second one. So the first one is bacteria one and the other one is bacteria two. So basically what we're going to do is try to compare and contrast gram -positive and negative bacterial cell envelope. So we'll talk about these subjects. Identify and state the important significance of the gram stain, especially as a bacteriological tool. Talk about exceptions to the gram reaction, which microorganisms do not stain properly with the gram stain. And then move on to the second one where we talk about virulence factors like capsules, lipopolysaccharide, and how do those play role on the pathogenesis of infections. Then we'll talk about bacterial spores and how unique they are and then talk about the medically significant spore forming bacteria and then we'll just talk about a little bit horizontal gene transferring bacteria and how is that important clinically with application and then we talk about different growth environment and bacteria and also again how important is that for a trained physician. So let's make sure we first define some basic terms so we're all on the same page. There's a term referred to as the cell envelope, and the cell envelope basically encompasses everything from the cell membrane out. So the cell membrane is part of the cell envelope, same thing with the cell wall. So again, be careful with that technology, cell membrane, which every cell has to have, is part of what's called the cell envelope. Now cell wall Not all cells have cell walls. In fact, animal cells by definition don't have a cell wall. That's what makes them an animal cell. In fact, the only way we can tell or we can classify a sponge as an animal is because it doesn't have cell walls. Plants, fungi, and all prokaryotes without a few exceptions all have cell walls. And the whole purpose of the cell wall, we'll discuss that later. Now, in a lot of bacteria, there are other structures that may be present, and those are all considered part of the cell envelope, so if there is pill, that's part of the cell envelope, there's flagella, that's part of the cell envelope, but if there is a capsule, that's also part the cell envelope, if there's an outer membrane, in addition to the cell membrane, that's also part of the cell envelope, there's a peri plasm, that's also part of cell envelope. So all these terms, the term cell envelope encompasses all of this and we'll discuss what periplasm is without a membrane and all those as we move along. This is a schematic presentation of what a bacterial cell looks like and so unlike eukaryotic cells like our cells, our cells have nuclei, they have what's called membrane-bound organelles. There are no membrane-bound organelles in prokriots, and so they do have organelles, for example. Prokriots have ribosomes, but they don't have membrane-bound organelles like mitochondria, like endoplasmic reticula, etc, vacuoles. In fact, the whole bacterium was almost the size of a mitochondrion. So everything is in the cytoplasm so what the bacterium lacks in complexity as far as internally it really compensates for it externally because you can see they have a coarse cell membrane that's a must all cells have cell membranes they must because that defines the cell but a lot of bacteria have uh cell walls um some of them have capsules some of them have plagella some of them have pili uh for you know different reasons uh pili which we'll talk about those those are structures are basically mainly that bind to the host cells, basically, so for attachment. PILNDR for attachment. FLAGULLA are for movement or motility. Of course, the prokaryotes have DNA, but they don't have a nucleus. Instead, their DNA is kind of packaged densely inside the cytoplasm in an area called the nucleoid and so that's what the term used, nucleoid. Remember as we talked in genetic lecture, bacteria typically have circular DNA and it's super cold and that involves remembering the topoisomerase enzymes. I just want to take a little time here to emphasize the function of the cell walls. So cell walls, again the only living things that don't have cell walls or animal cells by definition they only have a cell wall everything else has a cell wall plants fungi bacteria that's pretty much like 98 percent if not more of all different things uh so again with the exception of animals so why do they have this cell wall uh basically to resist osmotic pressure uh typically cells have a lot of stuff like proteins like acids you know everything the cell needs is inside the cell and so this creates a high osmotic gradient and water wants to come inside cells and so if it wasn't for the cell wall the cells would burst and you can actually see this you can use penicillin and look at the cell on the microscope and as penicillin inhabits the synthesis of cell wall eventually you see these cells deform and then eventually they explode because they'll just take on too much water so that's the function of the cell wall in animal cells that don't have cell walls what they do instead is they use this like a basically a sodium potassium pump to pump sodium out and once you pump sodium out you create a higher sodium on the outside of the cell which can help i mean again think of it like even in flooding people can either make dams which is what the cell wall is or they can use an actual sub pump or a pump which can pop water out so cells are not any different they're pretty much utilizing the same thing one of the most important uh microscopic stand in bacteriology is the stand developed by Hans Christian Graham in the almost in the 1930s, if I believe correct, which is referred to as the Graham stain, named after Hans Christian Graham. The beauty about the Graham stain is it's very simple, but at the same time it divides most bacteria into either Graham positive or Graham negative. Just be first aware with the terminology. Gram negative does not mean it's a negative result. That means the bacteria are classified like that. Both results are valid. Okay, so let's get into the steps of the gram stain, and how does the gram stain bacteriologically works. So first of all, before you embark on staining anything, and this goes back to some of the histology lectures, the first thing you have to do is fix the slide. So fixation is important, that usually happens before staining, so even though it doesn't mention that here, fixation always has to happen first. If you don't fix the slide everything gets washed off. And in bacteriology, fixation happens very simply using heat. You pass the slide with the bacteria on it through an open flame like three times gently you don't leave it there to sizzle so but you have to air dry it first make sure it's dry because if there's water it'll just boil and then deform the organism so you dry air dry and then fix so dry it and then fixation f-i-x fix and then you proceed with the stain okay so now the gram stain is considered a differential strain. Why? Because it's differential. It's not a simple stain. Simple stains have one stain. The gram stain is a differential stain because it can differentiate between two different organisms and so it must have two stains. So differential stains would have a primary stain and they'll also have what's called a counter stain by definition. The stain may be different but that's the terminology used. So the primary stain for the graham stain is crystal violet as you can see right here from the name it's kind of purplishing color so that's the first thing you do is you put crystal violet time wise for this it's usually one minute so you can leave the slide setting for one minute with crystal violet and then you wash now even though it doesn't say here you wash that's always customary and it's kind of implied that you always wash between you don't put one stain on top of the other. The timing for crystal violet one minute is flexible. If you go one minute 30 seconds or two minutes or, you know, that's not a big deal. It won't affect the outcome, let's say, of the stain. The next step here in the gram stain is using what's called a mordant. And what it is, what the mordant is, usually makes the first primary stain stick better. And that's typically in the gram stain, the chemical iodine so iodine is used second to make sure the crystal violet you know stains very well okay now at this juncture every cell as you can see every bacterial cell just about every cell really will stain purple because that's the only stain you're using so they'll pick it up now what happens in the next step is you add a decolorizer so you're trying to remove the stain from some of the organisms and the colorizer in the gram stain is typically 95 % ethanol or although sometimes could be a combination of like isopropanol but the most common one is 95% ethanol in alcohol and if this is done correctly and we'll talk about that gram positive bacteria should retain the crystal violet stain so they'll stay purple while the gram negative bacteria at this juncture will lose the stand and they of course they don't have any color they'll be colorless okay now why is that um we'll get into that a little bit more but just simply here and the difference between uh gram positives and gram negative bacteria is the thickness and the complexity of the cell wall so gram positive bacteria have a thick and intercalated uh so cross-linked cell wall while gram negative bacteria have a very thin one layer basically The cell wall is not very cross-linked, so it doesn't help it retain the slide as much. So if this is done properly, and we'll talk about what that means, again, the gram positive bacteria will stay purple, while the gram negatives will lose their crystal violet and become clear. So what is the correct timing for this? Oh, by the way, for the iodine, it's usually two minutes. We forgot to talk about that. but again, minutes and a half, two minutes and a half, it's no big deal. This is the step that you have to be the most careful of, the alcohol decolorization. With alcohol decolorization, the only way to do this, there's really no specific time. What you have to do is you have to grab the slide like this sideways, okay? Let's say this is the slide, here's your sample, and what you do is you come and put the alcohol, like, start dropping it drop -wise, okay? And so the alcohol will start washing off the slide. What you're going to see here is the blue crystal violet running off the slide. So you keep dropping until there's no longer blue, okay? So you tilt the slide sideways like this. Here's the sample. You put dropwise alcohol on the slide, it runs off. Once the purple color stops running, immediately you wash. And so this could take really anywhere between 20 seconds to 50 seconds all depends on how thick your sample is so there's no definitive time that can be given and you have to observe the runoff uh liquid or alcohol and see once it turns clear and no longer blue you immediately wash very well and if you've done that properly this is what you get gram positives stay blue gram negatives lose the stem okay now to stay in the gram negatives in order to see them, let's say your sample is just gram negative bacteria, if you stop here you pretty much will see nothing because, you know, clear bacteria on the microscope are very difficult and not impossible to see, which is why we use staining so you can visualize them. Then you use a counter stain and that's saffronin and saffronin is basically red to pink in color and so now all gram negatives should stay pink and gram positives will stay purple and again if that done correctly as you look here on the right side of the slide this is what classic gram stain looks like you have a combination here of gram positive bacteria so these round or cocci is the better term looking microbes and these rod shaped pink ones right here so this is the gram negative and this is the gram positive. And typically classically used here is this is probably staphylococci and this is probably E. coli and you can tell this is also staphylococci because staphylococci they cluster in these grape -like clusters. In fact the word staph means grape-like clusters. So this is a type of staph. Now you would not know what kind of staph like Staph oeus, Staph epidermidis, Stapophyticus, you wouldn't know the species name but you know it's staph from being gram positive, being cocci in shape and also having this grape-like cluster. And E. coli is typically rod shaped and they usually are random. They're small rods by the way, these are not big rods. They're small rods and it's gram negative. Okay so if done properly you'll be able to see both. Now of course most samples don't have both and so you got to keep in mind that it's very easy for you to tell the purple from the pink and the pink from the purple because of the contrast they're both on slide but a lot of times if these things are individually like by themselves they make you know like if it's just gram positive only on the slide or gram negative it might be a little bit more harder to tell it's not as easy as you might think so might be a good idea for you to look up a few things like gram positive organisms and gram negative and see if you can get used to looking at some of it. So the gram stain is a very powerful stain, very simple. This whole thing we talked about a minute, maybe two minutes, maybe 30 seconds, and counter stain usually one minute. So the whole thing is like five minutes really. And then you can divide the bacteria into two, which is very powerful. And in this case here, you can tell that you even have staphylococci because of the shape and because of the morphology and the pattern. And so the gram stain can be sometimes almost the like the final step to know what's going on and we'll talk about that we'll see that so clinically it can be very very useful and very simple in identifying the microbe and the patient may have. This is a sample of few organisms that being gram stand and just a kind of demonstration to show you first to get used to different gram stands and also to tell the information okay so if you look here on the top right side so these organisms by now you probably know what those are right and those look exactly like the ones we saw before so this is um what gram stand do you think these are uh so this is purple and the the pattern uh sorry the shape first is cocci so these are circular cocci so gram positive because they're purple cocci circular and the pattern is grape-like clusters as you can see it looks like you know like like grapes right and so this is staphylococci so again we can tell immediately the genus here staphylococci again we don't know if it's what species but we know it's actually a staphylococci by simply looking at the gram stain so it can be very indicative in that way so again looking at the gram stain because it's microscopy it can also tell us the shape of the organisms, and pattern. So let's look at this one right here on the left side. So these are also cocci, if you can tell, right? They also just like these one, a little smaller, but morphology, and they are pink, so those are gram -negative. So we're looking at gram-negative cocci. Now if I look at pattern, see what you're seeing here see I see a lot of them in pairs lots of lots of lots of ones in pairs okay and so these are in the pattern here is diploid so this is a gram -negative diploid and just simply looking at this seeing the gram reaction the shape of the organism and the pattern I know that this is probably the species, sorry, the genus, Neisseria. Okay. It's hard to type with a mouse, but you can look up Neisseria. Neisseria are medically significant because we can't tell which species of Neisseria this is, but this may either be Neisseria gonorrhea or Neisseria meningitidis. Of course, they cause different disease. Neisseria gonorrhea causes gonorrhea, while Neisseria meningitidis cause meningitis but you'll be able to tell which one right away really because uh from the sample you obtained right so if somebody has you're suspecting meningitis the sample beats cerebral spinal fluid if you're suspecting diarrhea you would you would um get like a ******* swab or something so knowing where the origin of the sample you can immediately know whether this is Neisseria gonorrhea or Neisseria mangelatis. So again, a five-minute very cheap stand can can figure it out. And so let's move on and look at the bottom here. So here are, these are purpling colors, so these are gram -positive. Their shape are rods and their pattern, they are in chains. See how they're long chains? And so this is very indicative of the species bacilli again sorry the genus bacilli so again we can't tell which species this is a bacillus anthraxis is a bacillus cereus is a bacillus septilus or megatherium we don't know you can't tell really just from the slot but you know it's bacillus at least again because they're gram positive rods in chains here too we're also looking at gram positives uh purple but these are uh also cocci so they look very similar to here right except a little smaller but these are also cocci but the difference between up here and down here is that these are cocci or in chains they are not in in grape-like clusters see the contrast so this tells me that these are streptococci so the word strep means chains okay versus the word staph which means grape-like clusters. So these are streptococci, strep chain, cocci, circular or spherical. And so we don't know what species of streptococci this is. This could be streptococcus biogenes, streptococcus mutans, and it can be many, there's many, many species of streptococci. But at least we know it's streptococci. We've narrowed it down this far. So let's discuss the structure of the cell wall. And we'll point out the difference between gram positive or negative. Of course one of the obvious things we said that the gram positive cell wall is multi-layered while the gram negative cell wall is one layer but there are also more nuanced differences. First and up front is the cell wall is sometimes referred to as the peptidoglycan. That's common terminology for the bacterial cell wall and that comes from the fact that it's made out of basically glycan, there are sugar moieties, peptido there's amino acid moieties and so in this case here the building blocks of the cell wall are alternating units of this N-acetyl glucose and N-acetyl muramic acid so these are the sugars these sugars are peculiar to bacteria and so these NAM and NEG units are bound together by covalent bonds as you can see here, and then attached to the NAM units are four different amino acids, okay, of course, attached by peptide bonds. And so this right here, this is the basic building block, the highlighting of the saw wall. So here's one building block, here's another building block, so to speak, right. Remember, the pepto-glyngyme is a polymer, so it's made out of pieces of monomers, kind of like how you make a brick wall, and so these are the pieces right there. So attached together, so this is them, and they're all the same, nam and nam units and four amino acids, and so in the case of gram-positive cells, there's five glycine residues that connect the two building blocks. In the case of gram-negatives, there's just one solid one basically one covalent bond between the these amino acid and that one that's it and so there's more inner connection in the gram positive cell wall preptoglycan versus in the gram negative okay that's the basics of it now a couple of connections here to things that you're going to see one of them is like the body makes an enzyme called lysozyme. And lysozyme is actually able to digest, it breaks the bond between NAM and NG, okay? Enzymes can do that. Penicillin, which, and you know, a lot of the drugs like penicillin and others work on inhibiting the synthesis of the cell wall. They don't break the cell wall because inhibited synthesis only enzymes do. Antibiotics don't. This is the largest group of antibiotics. So penicillin is one of them. Penicillin actually prevents this transpeptidation step. So without this one here, of course, you cannot join the units and you can't make the wall. Vancomycin also prevents the nam and nag unit from attaching. Also, you can't make the monomer itself, the building block. And so you can ultimately, in both cases, you can make the cell wall, but of course the approach are different. So this is a more close look at how the peptidoglycan is organized in gram-positive. So you can see we talked about those Nav and Ag units and again they're right here and you can see the cross-linking shown right there in yellow and you can see it's multi-layered so this is like usually just around like 30 layers here just showing like four okay but basically this is the peptidoglycan layer and again like i said a lot of times the peptidoglycan layer is synonymous with the word cell wall now one more thing you see here in um in the gram positive cell wall that you don't see in the gram negative is the presence of techoic acids and so think of this like rebar so these acids go uh particularly like this within the wall and provide them with more rigidity that's absent in gram negative so think of this as more like more reinforcement and so it's this complex structure multiple layers having the cross links that they call acid which allows the gram positive bacteria to hold on to crystal violet longer when you decolorize with alcohol versus gram negatives of course as always you have to have a cell membrane every cell has a cell membrane and this right here is the electron microscopy transmission electron microscopy of a cell envelope of a gram positive showing the peptidoglycan layer and the cell membrane you know pretty nice detail and this is the gram negative cell wall so it's right here here's the peptidoglycan layer one layer again nam and nag units and cross links remember the cross link here is just one bond it doesn't have the five lysine residues okay and cell membrane just like every cell has to have some membrane so the fact that this wall is so thin like this gram negative cells and can't really hold on to the crystal violet much so if you decolorize properly they use that stain and that's why you have to counter stain it with um saffron now one thing to a couple more things to note here since we are looking at the gram negative cell water of really big importance is that in addition to having a cell membrane which is of course phospholipid bilayer right there's also an outer membrane okay so um outer membrane right here okay so this whole layer right here is the outer membrane okay And so it has double membranes, one cell membrane, then peptidoglycan, then an outer membrane going from inside to the outside. Remember, all this is part of the cell envelope, okay, that terminology. But what is the significance of this outer membrane that is found in gram negatives only? And what is its composition? So for one, you see that the inside layer is phospholipid, just like the cell membrane, but this outside layer is kind of unique. it's also a lipid but it's a it's not phospholipid it's more of a lipopolysaccharide so it's a combination of lipids and sugar in short people refer to it as LPS or lipopolysaccharide means you look at this LPS molecule you'll see that now we'll go into that a little bit more but basically it's composed of three components a lipid A so that's the lipid part and then there's a sugar part the core polysaccharides and then this side chains that side chain is called the all specific side chain and that usually can be either long or short depending on the brand negative so you can have a oligosaccharide versus just a polysaccharide so that just depends on the species of bacteria we're thinking about and so So this double layer in gram negatives, and also this now creates a layer between the cell membrane and the outer membrane, this layer right here, which is known as the periplasm, which basically houses the cell wall. Now, the periplasm, you look at it here, it almost looks empty, but it's not really empty. It's a gel-like layer, which contains all the molecules and the proteins that move in and out of the cell. So this is a real layer. You don't see the periplasm, if any, in gram-positives. And of course, gram -positives don't have an outer membrane. So that's, again, one of the extinguished features of gram -negative. And we'll talk a little bit about this LPS molecule. This is not just the structural thing that gram negatives have, but this has very big importance from a clinical standpoint. Sometimes this molecule is known as the endotoxin because it can create a, it's a super antigen, so it can create a huge immunologic reaction in the body as a result of a gram negative infection. So we'll discuss LPS and the clinical significant LPS in the next few slides. But this is the important structure in different parts of the gram -negative cell. So again, here reiterating the components of the LPS layer, which is also known as the endotoxin. The endotoxin, because it's an internal, it's a toxin not released. Exotoxin are actually produced and actively produced released from the cell this is actually part of its structure so the influx is not actively released but if the cells are lysed or broken down then these molecules start um you know breaking off and going into solution and and they can cause a lot of trouble and again going back to uh the structure of the lpsd components the lipid A, the core oligosaccharide or polysaccharide, and then the oocyte antigen, which can differ in length. Now when people try to dissect and see which part of this molecule is the one that's causing the endotoxicity, they realize it's the lipid A. So if you just take lipid A by itself, inject it into mice, you'll kill it. But if you take those other components, nothing will happen. So it's really the toxicity is in the lipid. And what basically people figured out is that the lipid A can bind to many T lymphocytes in the body and activates them or activates a lot of T lymphocytes something like five percent of the total number of lymphocytes which is huge and that causes a lot of cytokines to be produced which cause a lot of tissue damage and so on and so people can die from of course endotoxemia pretty rapidly so and this is important when you're looking at a gram negative infection especially a massive type of gram negative infection. This is a schematic presentation showing how the endotoxin lipid A component, what it does in the body, so it can activate macrophages through toll-like receptors. And again, if you're not familiar with some of this terminology, we will discuss these in the upcoming immunology lectures. It can also activate complements, it can also activate a tissue factor resulting in the release here of a lot of cytokines IL-1, IL-6, tumor necrosis factor alpha, nitric oxide, it can cause fever, hypertension. C3A, C5A are a complement component which can really result in edema and bringing neutrophils to the sites, whatever they're released. Tissue factor activation can cause the use up of the coagulation cascade. Eventually it ends up with what's called disseminated intravascular coagulation. There's a lot of clotting which then use up all the clotting cascade which then results in hemorrhage. So I think some gear here from discussing the cell walls of bacteria. Now we're talking about another layer called the capsule. So if the capsule is present, and keep in mind capsules are not present in all bacteria. In fact very few bacteria have capsules. And even strains within the same bacteria can have them now. For example, some strains of streptococcin may have capsules, some of them may not. But if present, that would be almost the outermost layer. Remember, this is also part of this envelope. The capsule is a pretty large area, as you can see right here. So if you look here, right there, this is the organism. So it's a spherical right there so this is a gram positive okay so this is like the bacteria itself and this halo around it that's where the capsule is so typically what happens this is a capsule stain and what the capsule stain does it just basically stains the background and stains the bacteria but the capsule dissolves and so you see where it used to be okay so here is the like border mind of the capsule right there. One thing I want to just immediately notice is how large the capsule is relative the size of the bacterium itself. So this is obviously a great investment on the part of the organism to make such a big large structure. Mostly the capsule is made out of polysaccharide. Some capsules have some protein components but they're largely sugary in nature. but they can end up with a huge advantage to the organism unfortunately not so much of a good advantage for us as a host but from an organism standpoint from bacterium it's a it's very beneficial to have capsules one of the earliest experiments I read down once in the beginning turn of 19th century by a guy called Griffith and what he did he took capsules and inject them into mice and the virus and mice died now he took basically streptococci in capsules on the other hand, if you take the same strain of septic oxide, inject it into mice that doesn't have capsules, the mice live fine. So clearly the capsule helped the mice, sorry not helped the mice, helped the bacterium, the septic oxide in this case, infect the host, in this case the mice, very effectively and kill it. So what do capsules do? So one of the simplest things they do, at least initially, they allow the bacterium to stick to surfaces and they also allow them to stick to each other. So they can stick to things like unary catheters, indwelling devices, anything that's a foreign body in our body would allow the bacterium to stick to them. They're very difficult then to treat or remove without actually removing the foreign object itself. So if this was a replacement hip and somebody gets the infection then you have to either go in there try to flush that prosthetic itself or you have to remove the whole thing and restart the operation, which can be difficult. And in some cases you can't, so you just keep giving the people antibiotic for the rest of their life to keep the infection in check. So capsules, when they bind to each other and stick to each other, they form what's called a biological film or a biofilm. So this biofilm structure, which we find by the way on the surface of our teeth, and so if you feel your teeth and you feel they're slippery and that's why we have to like brush them all the time that's actually made out of a lot of capsules and so the bacteria use the capsules to stick to our teeth when they form this community of microbes on our teeth and other places too so it's obviously very advantageous. Capsules also make it more difficult for antibodies to act it also makes the bacteria more resistant to complement so I'll try to include those in the notes sections for you in the slide so resistant to antibodies highly resistant to complement and we'll talk about complement but what complement does it basically pokes holes into the bacterial cell wall or cell sorry cell membrane but of course if the capsule is there it's like having a big armor so it prevents this process from taking place all that does it makes the bacterium have a kind of a growing edge they have a head start because you can't kill them early and so they grow in higher numbers so it's very advantageous for the bacterium to have a capsule definitely not from the host they're also very difficult to clear from our body the spleen plays a very big role in clearing capsulated organisms and so if somebody has a sphenectomy, they become extremely susceptible to capsulite organisms and highly vulnerable. So before we remove somebody's spleen, ideally what you want to do is make sure you vaccinate them against a lot of pathogens. They may have capsules because then they will struggle with that. Okay, we discussed the gram stem and we talked about how the gram stem can divide bacteria into gram negative or gram positive. So for one, a couple of things let's talk about that. Not all bacteria are either gram -positive or gram-negative. First of all, the gram- positivity and gram-negativity is based on the presence of the cell wall but there are some bacteria like mycoplasmas and those are called wall-less bacteria. They're an exception to the rule they don't have a cell wall and as such they cannot stain by the gram stain. So mycoplasmas are not considered either gram-negative nor gram-positives. So they are wall-less. So one important aspect of this is you really cannot treat mycoplasmas with like penicillin or antibiotics that target a cell wall because they don't even have a cell wall. Mycoplasma, the most pathogenic one among mycoplasmas, mycoplasma pneumoniae, which causes walking pneumonia so if somebody ever had walking pneumonia this is the organ that causes that okay um another aspect of the gram stain so what happens if you have an organism let's say like mycobacteria which in mycobacteria is a pathogenic genus you can have like mycobacterium tuberculosis so that's the one that causes uh tb mycobacterium avium mycobacterium lepre that causes leprosy. So this is kind of an interesting genus. It's very important, highly important medically, so to speak, especially with tuberculosis being one of the top three killers in the world still and actually the most common disease worldwide with one -third of the population harbor mycobacteria to date. So, but mycobacteria have a thick cell wall, but if you try to stain them with the gram stain, they will not stain. In other words, they won't stain. Neither crystal violet no one would saprona they would be colorless or you actually wouldn't see it and so if they don't stain with the gram stain but they do have a thick cell wall so would they still be considered gram positive and so the answer to that yes and so gram positivity and gram negativity is really more governed by the structure now since we have the structure and we can look at the electron microscope and you can see if a bacterium has a wall and if it's thick or thin versus just simply go on by this thing so mycobacteria are considered gram positive even though they don't really stain with the gram stain and the reason they don't stain with the gram stain is because they have an acid in their cell wall called mycolic acid that's where they get their name mycobacteria mycolic this is an l acid. I can't seem to be able to insert a text here to type. So mycolic acid. So mycolic acids are unique to mycobacteria. What they do is once they, because they're part of their cell wall, it makes the cell wall very impenetrable. And so the only way to stain mycobacteria to steam with the microscope is you need to actually use heat, a lot of heat to drive the stain in. And so there's a special stain for staining organisms like mycobacteria called the acid fast stain which is a very important thing i will discuss that next in our lecture which actually allows us to identify mycobacteria because again they're unique they have mycolic acid they don't stain with the gram stain but hey since that's a unique property why not use it against them right and so we use the acid fast stain to identify mycobacteria and that stain we'll talk about more in more detail okay But I want you to make sure you don't confuse mycobacteria with mycoplasma. They're different, very different, different genesis. Mycoplasmas are wall-less, they don't have cell walls at all, they're not either gram -positive, nor gram -negative, and they cause walking pneumonia. While mycobacteria is a very important medical species, they do have a wall, it's a thick one, so they're gram-positive, but they also have mycolic acids in it and you know examples of this disease causing is like tuberculosis, leprosy and so on. Other organisms are very difficult to stain is Tryponema. Tryponema pallidum is the organ that causes the disease ******** and Tryponema pallidum is a very fastidious organism. The word fastidious means very difficult to grow. It doesn't like to grow it doesn't like the stain it's just a really peculiar one and so again they won't show up very well with the gram stain and same thing with all these legionella rickettsia chlamydia bartonella and lichia anaplasma species these are very difficult the reason also those particular group is that way because a lot of these are intracellular bacteria so they grow inside cells okay so try to try to stain a bacterium that's actually inside another cell that'll be very difficult and so these things these do not stand very well with the grafts then okay but you know they are they cause a lot of disease Legionella nemophilia causes pneumonia rickettsia it's a genus that causes depending on the type of rickettsia it could cause anything from like typhus to some other diseases chlamydia causes ******** transmitted disease and the list goes on and on okay i'm going to go with every single one of them but suffice to say that these are all grown inside our cells so they're difficult to stand by the gram stain and they are what you would consider an exception to the gram stain nomenclature it's a very small exception we can put it on one slide that we have millions of bacteria so most of them fall under the gram positive or gram negative nomenclature. Again, with the exception of this. So we just discussed mycobacteria and we talked about how mycobacteria have mycolic acids in their cell wall and that prevents them from being stained with the acid-fast stain, but then we said they can actually stain with another stain called the acid -fast stain. And so let's talk about the acid-fast stain and other stains and talk about these organisms and how that works so the acid fast stain the classic acid fast stain was developed by two bacteriologists and so it's called the zeal nelson stain um it's a really old stain just as old as the graham stain and the way it works like i told you um it you know you have to use heat to uh to drive the stain into the mycobacteria but then once they pick it up so you to drive it use heat and a lot of heat for several minutes to get that stain in and so usually use carbofusion as the primary stain and you use heat to drive it in and then once it picks up the stain the macrobacteria they're very difficult to you know to let go of it and so now even if you use a decolorizer like acid alcohol so it's a combination of acid and alcohol which is a very powerful decolorizer they won't lose that stain very easily okay and so then you counter stain anything else in the sample with methylene blue and so here it's almost like the opposite colors of the graham stain right because what you're looking for ends up being pink or red which is the carbofusion and the counter stain ends up being the blue which is the methylene blue but it's the same basic thing you have a primary stain you have a counter stain you have a decolorizer in that sense it's like it's exactly the same as the grap stain so if you do this properly members that are acid fast positive would look like this they would look hot pink or red while anything that is not would look blue so let's say if you mix E. coli with microbacteria microbacteria is acid fast positive they call it and so it will show up as red while E.coli would show up as blue or any other organs that's not acid facet. Now the acid facet thing is the classic one that's been used for a long time but currently clinically or at least for the last several years laboratories no longer use the acid facet. It's just you know because you have to use the heat and so it's very messy and people can like spill it on themselves and on their you know lap gowns etc if you don't decolorize properly you can you can have some problems with it so it's it's a multi-step process that can introduce errors especially if your technician is not used to doing the asset fast thing so if you know a lot of standard labs people try to move to more simpler and more reliable type of test so instead of the acid fast test or the zeal nelson stain the the currently used staining method in clinical laboratories is the oramine rhodamine stain and so and this is a fluorescent stain okay and so this is a simpler stain it says it's more expensive because fluorescent stains are more expensive in the special microscope which is a fluorescent microscope but it's less time it doesn't need any experience you could see it at low magnification like 400 instead of having to go to a thousand which requires oil but of course you get the microscope a fluorescent microscope sorry not just a regular microscope which tends to be like two to three times more expensive than a typical microscope but it's a one-time purchase and you have it for good and so what how does this work very simple the oramine rhodamine dye binds to only the mycobacteria because it's tagged on antibody and so once they fluoresce as you can see right here uh then you know that these guys are acid fast positive uh if they don't fluoresce then the sample is negative so there's no cavistane really they're just like either fluoresce or you don't okay and that's the not common one now people use for so if you suspect somebody has to be you send their sputum uh take a sputum sample send it to the lab they'll do an oramine, rhodamine stain, and report back to you whether the organism is acid fast or not, okay? And there's also now more application using nucleic acid amplification, so like PCR. So PCR is also done on samples of mycobacterium, which gives you a very quick result, but keep in mind the gold standard for the diagnosis of TB continues to be a till -to-date culture. So even though you start and you have all these tools you get the acid fast positivity you do a pcr you may identify mycobacterium you still have to do culture you still have to wait for culture the problem with cultures for mycobacteria is they're of course hazardous for one second they also take like uh six to eight weeks to to grow the organism is very slow grower it divides every 18 hours it's really slow in that sense so it takes a while for the cultures to come back so you can't really just sit there and leave the patient for two months with tuberculosis instead of trying to treat them. But again, the culture is still the only way to confirm the disease, so that's the gold standard and must be done. By the way, sometimes that's a board question and that can come on the boards and make sure they ask you what's the gold standard for identification of the disease and that would be culture, not all these other ones. But these are all important because they give you all this information and you realize that this is important. somebody has tuberculosis this is a public health emergency they can give it to other people you have to give prophylaxis their family you have to isolate them i mean it's a real big deal to have to be so today it's the one thing that you guys will get screened for right by taking the skin test just a quick comment about the acid fast stain uh so while the acid fast stain helps identify mycobacteria mycobacteria and species are not the only ones that are that would stain acid fast. There's several others including some fungi like cryptococci that will stain positive with the acid fast stain and nocardia another bacterium that could stain. So having a finding of acid fast bacilli on a particular sample does not conclusively means that we have mycobacteria but it's definitely leaning in that direction. But it could also be like I said it could be nocardia, it could be cryptoid, it could be some So keep that in mind.