Hello, everyone. Welcome to my lecture, Reticular Formation. In this lecture, we're going to describe the anatomical organization and subdivisions of the reticular formation, especially understand the major functions as well as the neurochemistry of this area. We're also going to touch on the neurophysiology of sleep and touch on the clinical implications of the dysfunction at reticular formation. Please note that reticular formation nowadays, because of the unclear definition, a lot of the textbooks doesn't have a special chapter for it. You can review the detailed objectives in our CPG. And I also prepared a 10-page lecture note in the CPG at the very end to help you understand the content. There isn't any scholar or experts here available mapping on the complex blueprint there isn't very specific reticular formation like a direct correlation but you can see here the sleep disturbances including the cognitive impairments are emphasized here in great details in our blueprint for the usmle blueprint there are emphasis about reticular formation in the normal processes as well as the global cerebral dysfunction like altered states of consciousness, sleep disorders, so quite similar to our complex blueprint. So what is reticular formation? So this structure is actually a very blurry one, unlike others, has clear anatomical boundaries. This structure is really, it's a long structure, but does not have clear boundaries or clear anatomical isolations of nuclei. Initially, this was found in a cat. So when you make a transection at midbrain level, you're going to see the cat are constantly remaining sleeping. And then if you make a cut at the pond's level, then this cat is constantly awake, so cannot go to sleep. But if you make a cut in the medulla, then this cat has a normal sleep-wake cycle. So obviously, this entire brainstem has a very important role in terms of regulating the sleep-awake cycle. But what exactly the locations, you know, the important nuclei are not really identifiable. So with these, you know, something like these areas that does not have the clear nuclei at the midbrain, pounds, or medulla, you can see these are blurry areas. Those are later defined as reticular formation. So nowadays, we call it extended rashly to the lateral hypothalamus and caudally connecting with the spinal cord. So basically the entire brainstem. And then it does not include the lung projection neurons that we talked about previously, you know, the lung tracks or ascending and descending tracks. It does not consist of cranial nerve nuclei that you're going to cover with Dr. Kurz's lecture. What it does contain is a lot of interneurons in the brainstem that can form the reflexes. It does still have projection neurons that initiate it in the brainstem. It can go either ascending to regulate cortex level of a function, or it can go descending to regulate spinal cord functions. But SARS originated from the brainstem area, so brainstem reticular formation. We're going to talk about ascending and descending functions of those in the next slide. The projection neurons release a lot of neurotransmitters. So those brainstem projection neurons has all these famous neurotransmitters like serotonin, norepinephrine, dopamine, acetylcholine, and histamine. So in this lecture, you need to pay attention to all of these neurotransmitters. What is the cell bodies producing these transmitters and where does those transmitter projecting to, and what's the main function of these neurotransmitters. The first one, serotonergic system. As you can see here, we have a large population of neurons here in the brainstem and runs along from the midbrain all the way to medulla. It's called roughy nuclei. The roughy nuclei along the entire brainstem controlling the, contributing to the arousal and attention. This system, you can see that it projects all over the brain, you know, projects all the way to the entire cortex and even to the cerebellum as well as down to the spinal cord. So this is a huge nuclei called raffin nuclei. It's the most important serotonergic neuron system in the brain. So you can see it also has a very strong relationship modulating pain. So the descending modulation of the pain sending the signals to the spinal cord releasing serotonin there to regulate painful sensation. And so for the reticular formation, the most important function, remember we talked about in the CAT study, is to produce activation of the reticular activating system to the entire cortex. So you can see here, you know, the entire cortex is receiving serotonin projection to help promote arousal, so help promote an individual to stay awake. And for the neurogenertic system, the biggest and most famous cell body located in the locus ceruleus, so you need to remember that as well. Locus ceruleus is located in the midbrain tegmental area. If you recall in the neuroanatomy lab we talked about the tegmental area in the midbrain which is anterior or ventral to the cerebral aqueduct. So we have the tectum which is the superior and inferior colliculi and we also have tegmentum. So locus cellulis is located in the midbrain tegmental area. It also controlling the, contributing to the arousal and this RAS system, reticular activating system. It has important function in terms of regulating sleep as well as pain. So very similar to serotonin previously, right, when we talked about arousal, pain, and sleep-wake cycle. In addition, it also has autonomic functions too. Norepinephrine is the most important neurotransmitter in the sympathetic nervous system. The autonomic functions that are regulated by the norepinephrine secretion. This is a very important system for ascending to send to the cortex for arousal attention, and then descending regulating pain and autonomic functions. Another important neurotransmitter that originates from the brainstem is dopamine. And so in other lectures, you probably have talked about the dopaminergic neurons, especially later on in the Dr. Curse's lecture related to the Parkinson's disease. And but that's actually only part of the story. So dopamine pathways, including four major pathways here. So there is a very important one originating from ventral tegmental area or VTA. So remember, we just talked about the tegmentum that's in the midbrain, right? ventral to the aqueduct. So ventral tegmental area is also a small area that does not have clear anatomical boundaries, but it's very important where the dopaminergic neuron cell body located. So from VTA, it can send the axons to the limbic area or cortical area. So from the VTA, it goes either to the cortical area called the mesocortical pathway or goes to the limbic structures like nucleus accumbens, striatum. So for the mesolimbic pathways, it's related more to addiction, the euphoria sensation, and also related to the hallucinations when there's a schizophrenic patient experience. The mesocortical pathway is very important for the cognitive functions. So clearly, it's related with the negative symptoms of schizophrenia, such as lack of apathy, reduced cognition function. And it also has a close relationship with Parkinson's disease, hypokinesia. So, mesocortical pathway is very important for cognition. And for the movement regulation in the Parkinson's disease, the nigrostriato system is the most important dopaminergic pathway. So, this pathway does not start from the VTA. It actually starts from Substantial ***** pars compacta. So this is the area that is extremely important and suffering from degeneration in the Parkinson's disease patients. This is a major pathway for coordinating movement. And lastly, there is a pathway called tubular infundibular system that is originating from the hypothalamus. These dopaminergic neurons have a relatively simple function. they inhibit the prolactin release from the pituitary gland. So this is relatively less important comparing to the other three in terms of regulating our daily life. So dopamine doesn't have a whole lot of relationship with the sleep-weight cycle regulation. What about the acetylcholine? Previously, we mentioned about acetylcholine that's being released by the autonomic nervous system and also the lower motor neurons use it to innervate the muscles. So here inside the brainstem, there is a large cholinergic nuclei called the nucleus bacillus or a nucleus bacillus of Maynard. So this is at the base of forebrain that project to the entire cortex. So it's right here. There's another location at the tegmentum. It's called the pedunculopontine tegmental nuclei. That is projecting to the brainstem as well as to the spinal cord. And acetylcholine has a very important relationship with cognition. So as you know, that Alzheimer's disease actually is highly involved with the decreased of acetylcholine release to the entire cortex. And then you have the cognitive deficit. It also highly related to the arousal and attention. So this is similar to the serotonin and norepinephrine in this regard. And it also has a lot to do with locomotion. So one of the categories of compounds in the Parkinson's disease is to use acetylcholine antagonist to help balance out the lack of dopamine. All right, last but not least, histamine. The histamine system is also very important. We all had the experience of taking some allergy drug like Benadryl, right? So Benadryl is the first-generation antihistamine, and it produces a very strong drowsy side effect. So histamine itself is related to the arousal. If you antagonize histamine's effect, you're going to promote sleep. And the histamine is released by the posterior lateral hypothalamus and the tuberomammillary nucleus, so basically in the hypothalamus area. and it also project all over the cortex. Here is a summary slide trying to depict all these different neurotransmitters, where is the major location for, you know, different neurotransmitters to be released, produced and released. So here, take Rafi as example, you can see there's a large serotonergic neurons population located right in the midline And this is the most important serotonin-producing neurons located in the raffin nuclei. And another very prominent one is dopaminergic neurons at substantia *****. This is the main degenerated structure in the Parkinson's disease patients. This patient has a greatly reduced function of the nigrostriatal pathway, the dopaminergic pathways. So make sure you review these. And then locus cellulis here, LC, is the most important norepinephrine production loci in the brain. So we know besides autonomic sympathetic nervous system, norepinephrine is produced by the locus cellulis. So make sure you remember that. all right after talking about the five different neurotransmitters now let's look at the circuitry level what kind of functions they're controlling there are ascending functions and descending functions as we mentioned before so the local functions like intrinsic connections controlling brainstem reflexes is also going to be covered briefly. For the ascending, we're going to talk about arousal, attention, and sleep regulations. That's going to happen first. ARAS, Ascending Reticular Activating System, or RAS, Reticular Activating System, are the most important system controlling the awake and sleep cycle and also conscious awareness of the surroundings to wake up and keep the cerebral cortex paying attention. All of those five projection neurons that we mentioned are sending projections to help us awake and maintain alert to maintain our cognitive function. Traumatic brain injuries are the most important cause for losing consciousness and cognitive functions among all the reasons FOSS and a motor vehicle accident took the about half of the cases especially for elderly FOSS is a very important reason for the traumatic brain injury and causing deficits of cognition and consciousness. There is a chart here to show two aspects of level of consciousness. So one is about alertness, which is whether awake or sleep. And the other is awareness. So awareness meaning how much do you, are you able to communicate with the environment. So those two aspects of consciousness are both important. As you can see here, the normal consciousness involves both high awareness and high alertness. And then the opposite stream is coma. So when you have coma, you would have extremely low alertness and low awareness to the surroundings. And in between these two, you have a different level of alertness and awareness. And for example, the persistent vegetative state has high alert. So this x -axis is high, but it doesn't have a lot of awareness. So it can't really communicate with the surroundings, with people like caregiver. So they have low awareness, but high alertness. And then, you know, we're going to also talk about this very interesting characteristic locked-in syndrome, which you also have high alertness and high awareness, but the patient just couldn't move. So different states, just remember these from, you know, the X and Y axis. what are these different states involved with. First, let's talk about coma. So coma is low on both aspects. As we mentioned, low arousal, low alertness, and low responsive means low awareness. So both markers are low. So it doesn't have any movement, and it doesn't have any sensory. And usually how we gauge how much deficits this person has using the Glasgow Coma Scale, so GCS. Glasgow Coma Scale is divided into three major aspects, eye -opening, verbal response, and motor response. So those are several different aspects and being given the score from, you know, either one to four or one to six, depending on how many of these functions are maintained. And the normal score is 15. And the lowest score actually is not zero, but three. And in between, you have different numbers. But this number is important. So if the Glasgow Coma Scale is less than or equal to 8, that means there's a most likely severe head injury. So be sure to remember this number. Next one is persistent vegetative state. This is a state that the patient has maintained the normal sleep -wake cycle, so their eyes can open and close. However, they don't really respond to the environment. If you're trying to communicate with the patients, they would not be able to respond to it. So there is a famous patient, her husband actually filed a lawsuit to stop her life support and then her parents are you know violently against that so they had a very long lawsuit and was terry's feeding tube being unplugged four times and eventually in 2005 her husband won the case you guys can search for this patient online and it was a very highly public case and stimulated the movement like right to die like protecting the life you know all different kind of human right groups activities so does this persistent vegetative state patients truly do not have any awareness to the environment. Some of the neuroimaging actually shows the opposite. As you can see here, these are the, you know, patient's MRI, and then these are the controls. The both imaging that's showing, you know, for the persistent vegetative state patients have a similar type of brain activation when they're imagining playing tennis or when they're imagining walking around the home. So you can see, you know, those brain regions that related to the healthy control is also lighting up in the persistent vegetative state patients. So this is very interesting to show that they do still understand the command. They are able to, you know, change their mind when they have, you know, some external stimuli being absorbed. However, they just could not express themselves normally to show their awareness. So whether this is across the board to other patients, it's still a question. This is only one patient being shown to have these intact brain signals. the next one that's a slightly less severe than the persistent vegetative state is called minimally conscious state so as you can see here there are some consciousness signs like they have occasional responses to the environmental stimulations some response to instructions language, or recognition of objects. But they're still pretty consistently maintaining low consciousness compared to the other, like locked-in syndrome. So locked-in syndrome is a very strange condition. So in this condition, the patients are actually fully aware and fully alert. So these patients has a normal ARAS, and so they are able to understand and respond to the environments, but they just can't move. So it feels like they're locked into this lying positions, except for they can move their eyes. So the minimal eye movement kind of show that they do understand the languages, instructions, and they do know what you're talking about. And interestingly, you know, with this movie, The Diving Bell and the Butterfly actually recorded a true story that the locked-in patient here is able to even write a book by communicating with his assistant who would do it letter by letter for him when you know she was asking you know what letter next and the patient just respond by blinking yes or no so with this very time-consuming laborious practice the patient are able to was able to write a book in this movie and publish the book. So that means this type of patient with Lockheed-In Syndrome, they do have intact consciousness and they can communicate effectively with the outside world with a preserved eye movement. One thing to remember that these can be caused by severe pontine lesions that sever the motor tracks. Only the motor tracks, though, because the sensory tract are still intact for these patients. So the Lochtein syndrome is permanent as well. So you can see here with the large pontine lesion due to the ******. And ALS can also cause Lochtein syndrome. So it's the mostly upper motor neuron lesion disease. But when it's severe enough, the upper motor neurons of all the body functions are impaired. That's kind of at the last stage of their lives. Usually, the ALS patients can suffer from locked-in syndrome as well. How exactly does sleep or wakefulness being controlled here? The definition of sleep, obviously, we all sleep, right? So we know we have reduced motor activity and decreased response to the outside stimuli. So here, the color coding with light green showing the wakefulness that's related with arousal. And then the purple showing the importance of these structures related with promoting sleep. As you recall, at the beginning of this lecture, we talked about if we make a transsection at the midbrain level, then the patient will remain constantly sleepy. And then if we make a lesion at the pons level, and then the patients will remain constantly awake. So that means this structure in the brainstem has very important regulator functions to regulating the awake and sleep cycle. Let's look at different stages of sleep and wakefulness with EEG. So the EEG has different patterns at different conscious states. During the wake with eyes open, these are the beta waves. As you can see here, it looks small, up and down waves. And when the person is relaxed, this wave becomes bigger, which is called alpha waves. And when you have a non-REM sleep, so REM means rapid eye movement. So non-REM sleep is a normal sleep. So REM sleep is a special type of sleep. So you can see that with the three stages of a non-REM sleep, you know, N1, N2, and N3, the wave gets bigger and bigger. So the delta wave at N3 stage is very characteristic. So this one is a slow wave sleep. It's, you know, SWS. The slow wave sleep is the deepest sleep a person could experience. And, you know, in between you have N1, looks more like the, it's called zeta wave, looks more like the awake stage. And N2 has the characteristic K complex, you know, which are those large spikes of the sleep waves. And also sleep spindles, like the, you know, all of a sudden much more frequent spikes. So those are the characteristics for the N2. So basically, you can see the transition from the awake to deep sleep. And then the REM sleep, the rapid eye movement sleep, is the strangest one. As you can see, the waveform looks more like awake. It looks more like a beta wave. However, it's not completely the same. And so we're going to look at the different stages further in the next slide. From this chart, we can see as a person aged, you can see the normal sleeping time become reduced over time. From the histogram, we can look at the sleep patterns of a normal adult. You can see initially when a person falling asleep, it goes through all these stages all the way to the very deep sleep, the slow wave sleep, and then comes back up to the REM sleep and then go back down again to the deep sleep. And occasionally you see the person will wake up, you know, gain the full consciousness. But overall, this is rare. And then you can see over time, you know, when it's closer to wake up time, then the sleep gets shallower and shallower. So eventually, you know, it becomes awake. For an older person, you can see this pattern become a lot less rhythmic. You can see a lot more wake up time. So a lot of, you know, spikes to wake up time. and also the initial sleep is shallower compared to the normal adult and then a lot more of this cycle is going back and forth between sleep and wake so the quality of the sleep is different now let's compare the physiological correlates during sleep so the heart rate for the slow wave sleep, the heart rate is reduced from awake. However, for the REM sleep, it's actually increased from the slow wave sleep. So basically, this REM sleep is a more active stage, which correlates to the EEG when you have closer to awake state sleep waves. The blood pressure for the slow wave sleep, you have decreased blood pressure, but then this is increased when you reach the REM sleep. And respiration is also increased from the slow-wave sleep. Similarly, the blood flow to the brain increases, and the GI activity is actually increased during the slow-wave sleep, so we actually digest better when we're sleeping. and this does not change in the REM sleep. Body temperature, this is an interesting one. So you have a reduced body temperature during the slow wave sleep, but then this is actually further reduced during the REM sleep. Another special part is that the muscle tone is also further reduced from the slow wave sleep. So this is actually kind of correlating to when we have dreams, right? So the REM sleep is related a lot with the dreams. And then, you know, we all probably have the experience that you're trying to escape from something dangerous, but you just can't move your arms or legs. It's just extremely difficult to move. So that's kind of correlating to this reduced muscle tone. So you're almost acting like you're awake. But on the other hand, And the body temperature and the muscle tones are reduced further from even the slow -wave sleep. So this is a very special sleep stage, the REM sleep. And then, of course, the characteristic rapid eye movement during this sleep stage. Now let's talk about the neurochemistry of sleep. What kind of neurotransmitters are regulating sleep and wakefulness? As we know, the glutamate is a universal excitatory neurotransmitters that promotes awakefulness. And so does serotonin, norepinephrine, acetylcholine, and histamine. So those are all part of the ARAS system. And so you need to remember where they are coming from. And an additional one is called hypocretin. This is a peptide. Another name for it is orexin. So it's the same thing. So hypocritin actually is produced by lateral hypothalamus, and it's found in the narcolepsy patients. Basically, these patients have very low level of hypocritin in the brain, and they have excessive daytime sleepiness, showing here for this little girl. So basically what hypocritin do is that it promotes all kinds of excitatory neurotransmitters that's releasing, that promoting wakefulness, except for GABA. So GABA here actually promotes the negative feedback control. But basically, the hypocritin promotes all of these excitatory neurotransmitters to promote wakefulness. That's why, you know, for narcolepsy patients, if we need to treat it, we need to promote the production of these excitatory neurotransmitters. And the The neurotransmitters that are promoting sleep, we know a most famous one is GABA. So the ones that are currently used as sleeping aids, such as benzodiazepines, barbiturates, all work on promoting GABA. So GABA mainly produced at the basal forebrain and hypothalamus. Those are the most important areas that are regulating sleep. There's also another very famous neurotransmitter called melatonin. It's a hormone that's very important regulating the circadian cycle. It's stimulated by the suprachiasmatic nucleus and producing, stimulating pineal gland to secrete melatonin. So showing here the VLPO and the suprachiasmatic nucleus. So those are the important neurotransmitters that are promoting sleep. This is a summary slide. So you can test yourself by filling in what type of neurotransmitters and then involved with wakefulness, non-REM sleep, and REM sleep. So we can fill in this one by one. So preoptic area is secreting GABA, and GABA is not secreted very much. It's inhibited during wakefulness, but it's promoted increased release during the non-REM sleep, as well as REM sleep. Lateral hypothalamus is producing orexin and hypocritin. It's promoting wakefulness, and it's inhibited during the non-REM sleep and REM sleep. For the tubular mammillary nucleus, we have histamine produced, and it's also promoting wakefulness and being inhibited during the non-REM sleep and REM sleep. Raffin nuclei, those are serotonin-producing neurons, promoting wakefulness, and it has a little bit but reduced secretion during the non-REM sleep and pretty much no secretion completely inhibited in the REM sleep. Locust cerulis is secreting norepinephrine, which also promotes wakefulness and has a reduced level during the non-REM sleep and much inhibited during the REM sleep. Basal forebrain is producing acetylcholine. Acetylcholine also producing, promoting wakefulness, is also being reduced during the non-REM sleep. However, it's actually increased release during the REM sleep. So you can see here GABA and acetylcholine. I use a different color for them because GABA is a major inhibitor in neurotransmitters here that promoting sleep. So it has increased secretion during sleep and specifically it has increased secretion during REM sleep as well as acetylcholine. So just need to remember this special situation. Now, we've mentioned that for narcolepsy treatment, we would like to promote these neurotransmitters that are promoting weightfulness. You can see we use the uptake inhibitors for dopamine norepinephrine serotonin or dopamine and norepinephrine together so these are the drugs that can promote sleep promote awakefulness and what can we do to help promote sleep and you can see all of these GABA-related, GABA potentiators that are used as a sleeping aid, and also the serotonin 1A receptor partial agonist, as well as orexin receptor antagonist, and the melatonin agonist. So basically, what we want to do is to increase the neurotransmitters that are inhibitory, right that promotes sleep increase GABA increase melatonin and decrease orexin or hypocretin and also a special serotonin receptor partial agonist so these are the mechanism that makes sense, right? So once you learn the sleep physiology, you will be able to understand why we use these type of compounds to treat insomnia or to treat excessive sleepiness, narcolepsy. Okay, the descending projecting functions from the reticular formation. So we have talked about maturation and cardiac reflexes in the autonomic nervous system lecture. And now let's go through the motor functions and the pain regulation for this descending modulation. This is a video that you can watch for two very special rigidity status, and one called decorticate, the other is decerebrate. So you can watch this video at YouTube. And the descending motor control from the brainstem mainly include the extrapyramidal tracts. The extrapyramidal tracts can start with the midbrain red nucleus, reticular formation, olive and vestibular nuclei to the spinal cord. You can see all of these are something to the spinal spinal cord tract. This extrapyramidal tract help control different types of extensors and flexors. And when there is any damage above the red nucleus, the patient can experience decorticate rigidity. So decorticate is actually for the upper limb the flexor is activated and for lower limb the extensor is actually activated. So this is because when there is any damage above the retinocleus the rubrospinal tract now is intact and being in control, so producing this very specific decorticate rigidity. The cerebrate rigidity is when the damage is at or below the red nucleus level. And when this happens, the red nucleus, the rubrospinal tract is damaged. And now the vestibular and reticular spinal tracts are dominating. And now you would see all four limbs are extended. So you can kind of remember this by, you know, I highlighted the core decorticate, and then you can imagine the two fists are coming into the center or to the core. So that can help you remember this decorticate rigidity. This is when the red nucleus, above the red nucleus is damaged. Let's talk about the descending pain modulation. So the most important structure for the descending pain modulation is called periaqueductal gray, or PAG. So PAG is very important to engage the descending pain modulatory pathways, such as locus cerulis and rastroventromedia medulla. We call it RVM. So locus cerulis is a major norepinephrine -producing region. And we already talked about it's regulating the pain sensation. And rostroventromelial medulla is connected with the raphe magnus that is producing the serotonin. And serotonin can also be projected to the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. So all of these PAG, locus cellulis, and RVM can produce projection neurons to the dorsal horn of the spinal cord, and especially the superficial layer of the spinal cord, we call it substantia gelatinosa. Over there, there are a lot of encephaline -containing interneurons to suppress pain. So the PAG can produce very strong, powerful, descending pain inhibition. And in fact, if you do electrical stimulation of the PAG area, you're able to completely suppress the pain sensation. And even patients can be done, even surgeries can be done to those patients that receive the electrical stimulation at PAG. So just alone, without any anesthetics, the PAG producing profound descending pain inhibition. And this pathway actually has been shown to be altered in the chronic neuropathic pain patient. So this patient has increased functional connectivity among all these structures. And most likely, they are actually promoting descending facilitation rather than descending pain inhibition. the descending pain inhibitor system actually have a very important clinical indication related to the therapeutic you know the chronic analgesic efficacy as you can see here this study done by Dr. David Yarninski, he has discovered that the CPM, the condition pain modulation, expressed by the patients actually can predict the efficacy of a drug deloxetine. So deloxetine is a SNRI, so it can increase the synaptic norepinephrine and serotonin concentration. So to promote or potentiate this descending pain inhibitor system. So the patients who has less efficient condition pain modulation or CPM actually can benefit more from this drug. So this is very useful when you know clinically when the doctors prescribe different analgesics for patients to treat chronic pain. All right. That's all for today's lecture. So this is a few review slides that you could really pause the slide, pause the video, and try to answer these questions on your own. So, for example, these are five different circuitry. And are you able to tell which neurotransmitters is involved with these pathways and which pathway exactly it is? So you can fill in these blanks, and here are the answers. Now, the second summary slide, you can fill in the blank to see what anatomical area producing what kind of neurotransmitters in order to produce arousal, sleep, motor control, pain modulation, bladder control, and respiration. So pause the video now and fill in the blank on your own. Here are the answers. Same thing here. Try to test yourself by fill in the blank for all of these questions that I listed here. These are all the neurochemicals and the, you know, related rigidity that's really very relevant to the reticular formation function. And again, here are the answers. So have you got these all correctly? I hope you did. and if you have any questions make sure you email me and